V THE MATERIAL AND SOURCES OF DREAMS

After coming to realise from the analysis of the dream of
Irma’s injection that the dream is the fulfilment of a wish,
our interest was next directed to ascertaining whether we had
thus discovered a universal characteristic of the dream, and
for the time being we put aside every other question which
may have been aroused in the course of that interpretation.
Now that we have reached the goal upon one of these paths,
we may turn back and select a new starting-point for our
excursions among the problems of the dream, even though we
may lose sight for a time of the theme of wish-fulfilment,
which has been as yet by no means exhaustively treated.

Now that we are able, by applying our process of interpretation,
to discover a latent dream content which far surpasses
the manifest dream content in point of significance, we
are impelled to take up the individual dream problems afresh,
in order to see whether the riddles and contradictions which
seemed, when we had only the manifest content, beyond our
reach may not be solved for us satisfactorily.

The statements of the authors concerning the relation of
the dream to waking life, as well as concerning the source of
the dream material, have been given at length in the introductory
chapter. We may recall that there are three peculiarities
of recollection in the dreams, which have been often
remarked but never explained:

1. That the dream distinctly prefers impressions of the
few days preceding; (Robert, [55] Strümpell, [66] Hildebrandt, [35] also
Weed-Hallam [33] ).

2. That it makes its selection according to principles other
than those of our waking memory, in that it recalls not what
is essential and important, but what is subordinate and disregarded
( cf. p. 13).

3. That it has at its disposal the earliest impressions of
our childhood, and brings to light details from this period of
life which again seem trivial to us, and which in waking life
were considered long ago forgotten. [AP]

These peculiarities in the selection of the dream material
have of course been observed by the authors in connection
with the manifest dream content.

( a ) Recent and Indifferent Impressions in the Dream

If I now consult my own experience concerning the source
of the elements which appear in the dream, I must at once
express the opinion that some reference to the experiences of the day which has most recently passed is to be found in every
dream. Whatever dream I take up, whether my own or
another’s, this experience is always reaffirmed. Knowing
this fact, I can usually begin the work of interpretation by
trying to learn the experience of the previous day which has
stimulated the dream; for many cases, indeed, this is the
quickest way. In the case of the two dreams which I have
subjected to close analysis in the preceding chapter (of Irma’s
injection, and of my uncle with the yellow beard) the reference
to the previous day is so obvious that it needs no further
elucidation. But in order to show that this reference may be
regularly demonstrated, I shall examine a portion of my own
dream chronicle. I shall report the dreams only so far as is
necessary for the discovery of the dream stimulus in question.

1. I make a visit at a house where I am admitted only with
difficulty, &c., and meanwhile I keep a woman waiting for me.

Source. —A conversation in the evening with a female
relative to the effect that she would have to wait for some aid
which she demanded until, &c.

2. I have written a monograph about a certain (obscure)
species of plant.

Source. —I have seen in the show-window of a book store a monograph upon the genus cyclamen.

3. I see two women on the street, mother and daughter , the
latter of whom is my patient.

Source. —A female patient who is under treatment has told
me what difficulties her mother puts in the way of her continuing
the treatment.

4. At the book store of S. and R. I subscribe to a periodical
which costs 20 florins annually.

Source. —During the day my wife has reminded me that I
still owe her 20 florins of her weekly allowance.

5. I receive a communication , in which I am treated as a
member, from the Social Democratic Committee.

Source. —I have received communications simultaneously from
the Liberal Committee on Elections and from the president of
the Humanitarian Society, of which I am really a member.

6. A man on a steep rock in the middle of the ocean , after
the manner of Boecklin.

Source. — Dreyfus on Devil’s Island ; at the same time news
from my relatives in England , &c.

The question might be raised, whether the dream is invariably
connected with the events of the previous day, or
whether the reference may be extended to impressions from a
longer space of time in the immediate past. Probably this
matter cannot claim primary importance, but I should like
to decide in favour of the exclusive priority of the day before
the dream (the dream-day). As often as I thought I had
found a case where an impression of two or three days before
had been the source of the dream, I could convince myself,
after careful investigation, that this impression had been
remembered the day before, that a demonstrable reproduction
had been interpolated between the day of the event and the
time of the dream, and, furthermore, I was able to point out the
recent occasion upon which the recollection of the old impression
might have occurred. On the other hand, I was
unable to convince myself that a regular interval (H. Swoboda
calls the first one of this kind eighteen hours) of biological
significance occurs between the stimulating impression of the
day and its repetition in the dream. [AQ]

I am, therefore, of the opinion that the stimulus for
every dream is to be found among those experiences “upon
which one has not yet slept” for a night.

Thus the impressions of the immediate past (with the
exception of the day before the night of the dream) stand in
no different relation to the dream content from those of times
which are as far removed in the past as you please. The dream
may select its material from all times of life, provided only, that a chain of thought starting from one of the experiences
of the day of the dream (one of the “recent” impressions)
reaches back to these earlier ones.

But why this preference for recent impressions? We shall
reach some conjectures on this point if we subject one of the
dreams already mentioned to a more exact analysis. I select
the dream about the monograph.

Content of the dream.—I have written a monograph upon a certain plant. The book lies before me, I am just turning over
a folded coloured plate. A dried specimen of the plant is bound
with every copy, as though from a herbarium.

Analysis. —In the forenoon I saw in the show-window of a
book store a book entitled, The Genus Cyclamen , apparently
a monograph on this plant.

The cyclamen is the favourite flower of my wife. I reproach
myself for so seldom thinking to bring her flowers, as
she wishes. In connection with the theme “bringing flowers,”
I am reminded of a story which I recently told in a circle of
friends to prove my assertion that forgetting is very often the
purpose of the unconscious, and that in any case it warrants
a conclusion as to the secret disposition of the person who
forgets. A young woman who is accustomed to receive a
bunch of flowers from her husband on her birthday, misses
this token of affection on a festive occasion of this sort, and
thereupon bursts into tears. The husband comes up, and
is unable to account for her tears until she tells him, “To-day
is my birthday.” He strikes his forehead and cries, “Why,
I had completely forgotten it,” and wants to go out to get her
some flowers. But she is not to be consoled, for she sees in
the forgetfulness of her husband a proof that she does not
play the same part in his thoughts as formerly. This Mrs. L.
met my wife two days before, and told her that she was feeling
well, and asked about me. She was under my treatment years
ago.

Supplementary facts: I once actually wrote something
like a monograph on a plant, namely, an essay on the coca
plant, which drew the attention of K. Koller to the anæsthetic
properties of cocaine. I had hinted at this use of the alkaloid
in my publication, but I was not sufficiently thorough to
pursue the matter further. This suggests that on the forenoon
of the day after the dream (for the interpretation of which I
did not find time until the evening) I had thought of cocaine
in a kind of day phantasy. In case I should ever be afflicted
with glaucoma, I was going to go to Berlin, and there have
myself operated upon, incognito, at the house of my Berlin
friend, by a physician whom he would recommend to me. The
surgeon, who would not know upon whom he was operating,
would boast as usual how easy these operations had become since the introduction of cocaine; I would not betray by a
single sign that I had had a share in making this discovery.
With this phantasy were connected thoughts of how difficult
it really is for a doctor to claim the medical services of a
colleague for his own person. I should be able to pay the
Berlin eye specialist, who did not know me, like anyone else.
Only after recalling this day-dream do I realise that the
recollection of a definite experience is concealed behind it.
Shortly after Koller’s discovery my father had, in fact, become
ill with glaucoma; he was operated upon by my friend, the
eye specialist, Dr. Koenigstein. Dr. Koller attended to the
cocaine anæsthetisation, and thereupon made the remark
that all three of the persons who had shared in the introduction
of cocaine had been brought together on one case.

I now proceed to think of the time when I was last reminded
of this affair about the cocaine. This was a few days
before, when I received a Festschrift , with whose publication
grateful scholars had commemorated the anniversary of their
teacher and laboratory director. Among the honours
ascribed to persons connected with the laboratory, I found a
notice to the effect that the discovery of the anæsthetic properties
of cocaine had been made there by K. Koller. Now I
suddenly become aware that the dream is connected with an
experience of the previous evening. I had just accompanied
Dr. Koenigstein to his home, and had spoken to him about a
matter which strongly arouses my interest whenever it is
mentioned. While I was talking with him in the vestibule,
Professor Gärtner and his young wife came up. I could
not refrain from congratulating them both upon their healthy
appearance. Now Professor Gärtner is one of the authors
of the Festschrift of which I have just spoken, and may well
have recalled it to me. Likewise Mrs. L., whose birthday
disappointment I have referred to, had been mentioned, in
another connection, to be sure, in the conversation with Dr.
Koenigstein.

I shall now try to explain the other determinations of the
dream content. A dried specimen of the plant accompanies
the monograph as though it were a herbarium . A recollection
of the gymnasium (school) is connected with the herbarium.
The director of our gymnasium once called the scholars of the higher classes together in order to have them inspect and
clean the herbarium. Small worms had been found—bookworms.
The director did not seem to have much confidence
in my help, for he left only a few leaves for me. I know to this
day that there were crucifers on them. My interest in botany
was never very great. At my preliminary examination in
botany, I was required to identify a crucifer, and did not
recognise it. I would have fared badly if my theoretical
knowledge had not helped me out. Crucifers suggest composites.
The artichoke is really a composite, and the one
which I might call my favourite flower. My wife, who is
more thoughtful than I, often brings this favourite flower of
mine home from the market.

I see the monograph which I have written lying before me.
This, too, is not without its reference. The friend whom I
pictured wrote to me yesterday from Berlin: “I think a
great deal about your dream book. I see it lying before me
finished, and am turning over its leaves. ” How I envied him
this prophetic power! If I could only see it lying already
finished before me!

The folded Coloured Plate. —While I was a student of medicine,
I suffered much from a fondness for studying in monographs exclusively. In spite of my limited means, I subscribed to a
number of the medical archives, in which the coloured plates
gave me much delight. I was proud of this inclination for
thoroughness. So, when I began to publish on my own account,
I had to draw the plates for my own treatises, and I remember
one of them turned out so badly that a kindly-disposed colleague
ridiculed me for it. This suggests, I don’t know exactly
how, a very early memory from my youth. My father once
thought it would be a joke to hand over a book with coloured
plates ( Description of a Journey in Persia ) to me and my eldest
sister for destruction. This was hardly to be justified from
an educational point of view. I was at the time five years
old, and my sister three, and the picture of our blissfully tearing
this book to pieces (like an artichoke, I must add, leaf by leaf)
is almost the only one from this time of life which has remained
fresh in my memory. When I afterwards became a student,
I developed a distinct fondness for collecting and possessing
books (an analogy to the inclination for studying from monographs, a hobby which occurs in the dream thoughts with
reference to cyclamen and artichoke). I became a book-worm
( cf. herbarium). I have always referred this first passion of
my life—since I am engaging in retrospect—to this childhood
impression, or rather I have recognised in this childish scene
a “concealing recollection” for my subsequent love of books. [AR] Of course I also learned at an early age that our passions are
often our sorrows. When I was seventeen years old I had a
very respectable bill at the book store, and no means with
which to pay it, and my father would hardly accept the excuse
that my inclination had not been fixed on something worse.
But the mention of this later youthful experience immediately
brings me back to my conversation that evening with my
friend Dr. Koenigstein. For the talk on the evening of the
dream-day brought up the same old reproach that I am too
fond of my hobbies.

For reasons which do not belong here, I shall not continue
the interpretation of this dream, but shall simply indicate the
path which leads to it. In the course of the interpretation,
I was reminded of my conversation with Dr. Koenigstein, and
indeed of more than one portion of it. If I consider the
subjects touched upon in this conversation, the meaning of
the dream becomes clear to me. All the thought associations
which have been started, about the hobbies of my wife and of
myself, about the cocaine, about the difficulty of securing
medical treatment from one’s colleagues, my preference for
monographic studies, and my neglect of certain subjects such
as botany—all this continues and connects with some branch
of this widely ramified conversation. The dream again takes
on the character of a justification, of a pleading for my rights,
like the first analysed dream of Irma’s injection; it even
continues the theme which that dream started, and discusses
it with the new subject matter which has accrued in the interval
between the two dreams. Even the apparently indifferent
manner of expression of the dream receives new importance.
The meaning is now: “I am indeed the man who has written
that valuable and successful treatise (on cocaine),” just as at
that time I asserted for my justification: “I am a thorough and industrious student;” in both cases, then: “I can afford
to do that.” But I may dispense with the further interpretation
of the dream, because my only purpose in reporting
it was to examine the relation of the dream content to the
experience of the previous day which arouses it. As long as
I know only the manifest content of this dream, but one
relation to a day impression becomes obvious; after I have
made the interpretation, a second source of the dream becomes
evident in another experience of the same day. The first of
these impressions to which the dream refers is an indifferent
one, a subordinate circumstance. I see a book in a shop
window whose title holds me for a moment, and whose contents
could hardly interest me. The second experience has great
psychic value; I have talked earnestly with my friend, the
eye specialist, for about an hour, I have made allusions in
this conversation which must have touched both of us closely,
and which awakened memories revealing the most diverse
feelings of my inner self. Furthermore, this conversation was
broken off unfinished because some friends joined us. What,
now, is the relation of these two impressions of the day to each
other and to the dream which followed during the next night?

I find in the manifest content merely an allusion to the
indifferent impression, and may thus reaffirm that the dream
preferably takes up into its content non-essential experiences.
In the dream interpretation, on the contrary, everything converges
upon an important event which is justified in demanding
attention. If I judge the dream in the only correct way,
according to the latent content which is brought to light in
the analysis, I have unawares come upon a new and important
fact. I see the notion that the dream deals only with the
worthless fragments of daily experience shattered; I am
compelled also to contradict the assertion that our waking
psychic life is not continued in the dream, and that the dream
instead wastes psychic activity upon a trifling subject matter.
The opposite is true; what has occupied our minds during the
day also dominates our dream thoughts, and we take pains to
dream only of such matters as have given us food for thought
during the day.

Perhaps the most obvious explanation for the fact that I
dream about some indifferent impression of the day, while the impression which is justifiably stirring furnishes the
occasion for dreaming, is that this again is a phenomenon of
the dream-disfigurement, which we have above traced to a
psychic power acting as a censor. The recollection of the
monograph on the genus cyclamen is employed as though it
were an allusion to the conversation with my friend, very
much as mention of the friend in the dream of the deferred
supper is represented by the allusion “smoked salmon.” The
only question is, by what intermediate steps does the impression
of the monograph come to assume the relation of an
allusion to the conversation with the eye specialist, since such
a relation is not immediately evident. In the example of the
deferred supper, the relation is set forth at the outset; “smoked
salmon,” as the favourite dish of the friend, belongs at once
to the series of associations which the person of the friend would
call up in the lady who is dreaming. In our new example
we have two separated impressions, which seem at first glance
to have nothing in common except that they occur on the
same day. The monograph catches my attention in the
forenoon; I take part in the conversation in the evening.
The answer supplied by the analysis is as follows: Such relations
between the two impressions do not at first exist, but
are established subsequently between the presentation content
of the one impression and the presentation content of the
other. I have recently emphasised the components in this
relation in the course of recording the analysis. With the
notion of the monograph on cyclamen I should probably
associate the idea that cyclamen is my wife’s favourite flower
only under some outside influence, and this is perhaps the
further recollection of the bunch of flowers missed by Mrs. L.
I do not believe that these underlying thoughts would have
been sufficient to call forth a dream.

as we read in Hamlet . But behold! I am reminded in
the analysis that the name of the man who interrupted our
conversation was Gärtner (Gardener), and that I found his
wife in blooming health; [AS] I even remember now that one of my female patients, who bears the pretty name of Flora, was
for a time the main subject of our conversation. It must
have happened that I completed the connection between the
two events of the day, the indifferent and the exciting one, by
means of these links from the series of associations belonging
to the idea of botany. Other relations are then established,
that of cocaine, which can with perfect correctness form a go-between
connecting the person of Dr. Koenigstein with the
botanical monograph which I have written, and strengthen
the fusion of the two series of associations into one, so that now
a portion of the first experience may be used as an allusion to
the second.

I am prepared to find this explanation attacked as arbitrary
or artificial. What would have happened if Professor Gärtner
and his blooming wife had not come up, and if the patient
who was talked about had been called, not Flora, but Anna?
The answer is easy, however. If these thought-relations had
not been present, others would probably have been selected.
It is so easy to establish relations of this sort, as the joking
questions and conundrums with which we amuse ourselves
daily suffice to show. The range of wit is unlimited. To go a
step further: if it had been impossible to establish interrelations
of sufficient abundance between the two impressions
of the day, the dream would simply have resulted differently;
another of the indifferent impressions of the day, such as come
to us in multitudes and are forgotten, would have taken the
place of the monograph in the dream, would have secured a
connection with the content of the talk, and would have represented
it in the dream. Since it was the impression of the
monograph and no other that had this fate, this impression
was probably the most suitable for the establishment of the
connection. One need not be astonished, like Lessing’s Hänschen Schlau , because “it is the rich people of the world
who possess the most money.”

Still the psychological process by which, according to our
conception, the indifferent experience is substituted for the
psychologically important one, seems odd to us and open to
question. In a later chapter we shall undertake the task of
making this seemingly incorrect operation more intelligible.
We are here concerned only with consequences of this procedure, whose assumption we have been forced to make by
the regularly recurring experiences of dream analysis. But
the process seems to be that, in the course of those intermediate
steps, a displacement—let us say of the psychic accent—has
taken place, until ideas that are at first weakly charged
with intensity, by taking over the charge from ideas which
have a stronger initial intensity, reach a degree of strength,
which enables them to force their way into consciousness.
Such displacements do not at all surprise us when it is a
question of the bestowal of affects or of the motor actions in
general. The fact that the woman who has remained single
transfers her affection to animals, that the bachelor becomes a
passionate collector, that the soldier defends a scrap of coloured
cloth, his flag, with his life-blood, that in a love affair a momentary
clasping of hands brings bliss, or that in Othello a
lost handkerchief causes a burst of rage—all these are examples
of psychic displacement which seem unquestionable to us.
But if, in the same manner and according to the same fundamental
principles, a decision is made as to what is to reach our
consciousness and what is to be withheld from it, that is to
say, what we are to think—this produces an impression of
morbidity, and we call it an error of thought if it occurs in
waking life. We may here anticipate the result of a discussion
which will be undertaken later—namely, to the effect
that the psychic process which we have recognised as dream
displacement proves to be not a process morbidly disturbed,
but a process differing from the normal merely in being of a
more primitive nature.

We thus find in the fact that the dream content takes up
remnants of trivial experiences a manifestation of dream
disfigurement (by means of displacement), and we may recall
that we have recognised this dream disfigurement as the work
of a censor which controls the passage between two psychic
instances. We accordingly expect that dream analysis will
regularly reveal to us the genuine, significant source of
the dream in the life of the day, the recollection of which has
transferred its accent to some indifferent recollection. This
conception brings us into complete opposition to Robert’s [55] theory, which thus becomes valueless for us. The fact which
Robert was trying to explain simply doesn’t exist; its assumption is based upon a misunderstanding, upon the failure to
substitute the real meaning of the dream for its apparent
content. Further objection may be made to Robert’s doctrine:
If it were really the duty of the dream, by means of a special
psychic activity, to rid our memory of the “slag” of the recollections
of the day, our sleep would have to be more troubled
and employed in a more strained effort than we may suppose
it to be from our waking life. For the number of indifferent
impressions received during the day, against which we should
have to protect our memory, is obviously infinitely large; the
night would not be long enough to accomplish the task. It is
very much more probable that the forgetting of indifferent
impressions takes place without any active interference on the
part of our psychic powers.

Still something cautions us against taking leave of Robert’s
idea without further consideration. We have left unexplained
the fact that one of the indifferent day-impressions—one
from the previous day indeed—regularly furnished a
contribution to the dream-content. Relations between this
impression and the real source of the dream do not always
exist from the beginning; as we have seen, they are established
only subsequently, in the course of the dream-work,
as though in order to serve the purpose of the intended displacement.
There must, therefore, be some necessity to form
connections in this particular direction, of the recent, although
indifferent impression; the latter must have special fitness
for this purpose because of some property. Otherwise it
would be just as easy for the dream thoughts to transfer their
accent to some inessential member of their own series of
associations.

The following experiences will lead us to an explanation.
If a day has brought two or more experiences which are fitted
to stimulate a dream, then the dream fuses the mention of
both into a single whole; it obeys an impulse to fashion a whole
out of them ; for instance: One summer afternoon I entered
a railroad compartment, in which I met two friends who were
unknown to each other. One of them was an influential colleague,
the other a member of a distinguished family, whose
physician I was; I made the two gentlemen acquainted with
each other; but during the long ride I was the go-between in the conversation, so that I had to treat a subject of conversation
now with the one, now with the other. I asked
my colleague to recommend a common friend who had just
begun his medical practice. He answered that he was convinced
of the young man’s thoroughness, but that his plain
appearance would make his entrance into households of rank
difficult. I answered: “That is just why he needs recommendation.”
Soon afterwards I asked the other fellow-traveller
about the health of his aunt—the mother of one of
my patients—who was at the time prostrated by a serious
illness. During the night after this journey I dreamt that the
young friend, for whom I had asked assistance, was in a
splendid salon, and was making a funeral oration to a select
company with the air of a man of the world—the oration being
upon the old lady (now dead for the purposes of the dream)
who was the aunt of the second fellow-traveller. (I confess
frankly that I had not been on good terms with this lady.)
My dream had thus found connections between the two impressions
of the day, and by means of them composed a unified
situation.

In view of many similar experiences, I am driven to conclude
that a kind of compulsion exists for the dream function,
forcing it to bring together in the dream all the available
sources of dream stimulation into a unified whole. [AT] In a
subsequent chapter (on the dream function) we shall become
acquainted with this impulse for putting together as a part of
condensation another primary psychic process.

I shall now discuss the question whether the source from
which the dream originates, and to which our analysis leads,
must always be a recent (and significant) event, or whether
a subjective experience, that is to say, the recollection of a
psychologically valuable experience—a chain of thought—can
take the part of a dream stimulus. The answer, which results
most unequivocally from numerous analyses, is to the following
effect. The stimulus for the dream may be a subjective
occurrence, which has been made recent, as it were, by the mental activity during the day. It will probably not be out of
place here to give a synopsis of various conditions which may
be recognised as sources of dreams.

The source of a dream may be:

( a ) A recent and psychologically significant experience
which is directly represented in the dream. [AU]

( b ) Several recent, significant experiences, which are united
by the dream into a whole. [AV]

( c ) One or more recent and significant experiences, which
are represented in the dream by the mention of a contemporary
but indifferent experience. [AW]

( d ) A subjective significant experience (a recollection, train
of thought), which is regularly represented in the dream by the
mention of a recent but indifferent impression. [AX]

As may be seen, in dream interpretation the condition is
firmly adhered to throughout that each component of the
dream repeats a recent impression of the day. The element
which is destined to representation in the dream may either
belong to the presentations surrounding the actual dream
stimulus itself—and, furthermore, either as an essential or an
inessential element of the same—or it may originate in the
neighbourhood of an indifferent impression, which, through
associations more or less rich, has been brought into relation
with the thoughts surrounding the dream stimulus. The
apparent multiplicity of the conditions here is produced by the alternative according to whether displacement has or has not
taken place , and we may note that this alternative serves
to explain the contrasts of the dream just as readily as the
ascending series from partially awake to fully awake brain
cells in the medical theory of the dream ( cf. p. 64).

Concerning this series, it is further notable that the element
which is psychologically valuable, but not recent (a train of
thought, a recollection) may be replaced, for the purposes of
dream formation, by a recent, but psychologically indifferent,
element, if only these two conditions be observed: 1. That
the dream shall contain a reference to something which has been recently experienced; 2. That the dream stimulus shall
remain a psychologically valuable train of thought. In a
single case ( a ) both conditions are fulfilled by the same impression.
If it be added that the same indifferent impressions
which are used for the dream, as long as they are recent, lose
this availability as soon as they become a day (or at most
several days) older, the assumption must be made that the
very freshness of an impression gives it a certain psychological
value for dream formation, which is somewhat equivalent to
the value of emotionally accentuated memories or trains of
thought. We shall be able to see the basis of this value of recent impressions for dream formation only with the help
of certain psychological considerations which will appear
later. [AY]

Incidentally our attention is called to the fact that important
changes in the material comprised by our ideas and
our memory may be brought about unconsciously and at
night. The injunction that one should sleep for a night upon
any affair before making a final decision about it is obviously
fully justified. But we see that at this point we have proceeded
from the psychology of dreaming to that of sleep, a
step for which there will often be occasion.

Now there arises an objection threatening to invalidate the
conclusions we have just reached. If indifferent impressions
can get into the dream only in case they are recent, how does
it happen that we find also in the dream content elements
from earlier periods in our lives, which at the time when they
were recent possessed, as Strümpell expresses it, no psychic
value, which, therefore, ought to have been forgotten long ago,
and which, therefore, are neither fresh nor psychologically
significant?

This objection can be fully met if we rely upon the results
furnished by psychoanalysis of neurotics. The solution is as
follows: The process of displacement which substitutes indifferent
material for that having psychic significance (for
dreaming as well as for thinking) has already taken place in
those earlier periods of life, and has since become fixed in the
memory. Those elements which were originally indifferent
are in fact no longer so, since they have acquired the value of psychologically significant material. That which has actually
remained indifferent can never be reproduced in the dream.

It will be correct to suppose from the foregoing discussion
that I maintain that there are no indifferent dream stimuli,
and that, accordingly, there are no harmless dreams. This I
believe to be the case, thoroughly and exclusively, allowance
being made for the dreams of children and perhaps for short
dream reactions to nocturnal sensations. Whatever one may
dream, it is either manifestly recognisable as psychically
significant or it is disfigured, and can be judged correctly only
after a complete interpretation, when, as before, it may be
recognised as possessing psychic significance. The dream
never concerns itself with trifles; we do not allow ourselves
to be disturbed in our sleep by matters of slight importance.
Dreams which are apparently harmless turn out to be sinister
if one takes pains to interpret them; if I may be permitted
the expression, they all have “the mark of the beast.” As this
is another point on which I may expect opposition, and as
I am glad of an opportunity to show dream-disfigurement
at work, I shall here subject a number of dreams from my
collection to analysis.

1. An intelligent and refined young lady, who, however,
in conduct, belongs to the class we call reserved, to the “still
waters,” relates the following dream:—

Her husband asks: “Should not the piano be tuned?”
She answers: “It won’t pay; the hammers would have to be
newly buffed too.” This repeats an actual event of the previous
day. Her husband had asked such a question, and she had
answered something similar. But what is the significance of
her dreaming it? She tells of the piano, indeed, that it is a disgusting old box which has a bad tone; it is one of the things
which her husband had before they were married, [AZ] &c., but
the key to the true solution lies in the phrase: It won’t pay. This originated in a visit made the day before to a lady friend.
Here she was asked to take off her coat, but she declined,
saying, “ It won’t pay. I must go in a moment.” At this
point, I recall that during yesterday’s analysis she suddenly
took hold of her coat, a button of which had opened. It is, therefore, as if she had said, “Please don’t look in this direction;
it won’t pay.” Thus “ box ” develops into “ chest ,” or
breast-box (“bust”), and the interpretation of the dream
leads directly to a time in her bodily development when she
was dissatisfied with her shape. It also leads to earlier periods,
if we take into consideration “ disgusting ” and “ bad tone ,”
and remember how often in allusions and in dreams the two
small hemispheres of the feminine body take the place—as a
substitute and as an antithesis—of the large ones.

II. I may interrupt this dream to insert a brief harmless
dream of a young man. He dreamt that he was putting on his
winter overcoat again, which was terrible . The occasion for this
dream is apparently the cold weather, which has recently set
in again. On more careful examination we note that the two
short portions of the dream do not fit together well, for what
is there “terrible” about wearing a heavy or thick coat in
the cold? Unfortunately for the harmlessness of this dream,
the first idea educed in analysis is the recollection that on the
previous day a lady had secretly admitted to him that her
last child owed its existence to the bursting of a condom.
He now reconstructs his thoughts in accordance with this
suggestion: A thin condom is dangerous, a thick one is bad.
The condom is an “overcoat” ( Überzieher ), for it is put over
something; Ueberzieher is also the name given in German to a
thin overcoat. An experience like the one related by the lady
would indeed be “terrible” for an unmarried man.—We
may now return to our other harmless dreamer.

III. She puts a candle into a candlestick; but the candle is
broken, so that it does not stand straight. The girls at school say
she is clumsy; the young lady replies that it is not her fault.

Here, too, there is an actual occasion for the dream; the
day before she had actually put a candle into a candlestick;
but this one was not broken. A transparent symbolism has
been employed here. The candle is an object which excites
the feminine genitals; its being broken, so that it does not
stand straight, signifies impotence on the man’s part (“it is
not her fault”). But does this young woman, carefully
brought up, and a stranger to all obscenity, know of this
application of the candle? She happens to be able to tell how
she came by this information. While riding in a boat on the Rhine, another boat passes containing students who are singing
or rather yelling, with great delight: “When the Queen of
Sweden with closed shutters and the candles of Apollo....”

She does not hear or understand the last word. Her
husband is asked to give her the required explanation. These
verses are then replaced in the dream content by the harmless
recollection of a command which she once executed clumsily
at a girls’ boarding school, this occurring by means of the
common features closed shutters . The connection between the
theme of onanism and that of impotence is clear enough.
“Apollo” in the latent dream content connects this dream
with an earlier one in which the virgin Pallas figured. All this
is obviously not harmless.

IV. Lest it may seem too easy a matter to draw conclusions
from dreams concerning the dreamer’s real circumstances,
I add another dream coming from the same person
which likewise appears harmless. “ I dreamt of doing something ,”
she relates, “ which I actually did during the day, that
is to say, I filled a little trunk so full of hooks that I had difficulty
in closing it. My dream was just like the actual occurrence. ”
Here the person relating the dream herself attaches chief importance
to the correspondence between the dream and reality.
All such criticisms upon the dream and remarks about it,
although they have secured a place in waking thought, regularly
belong to the latent dream content, as later examples
will further demonstrate. We are told, then, that what the
dream relates has actually taken place during the day. It
would take us too far afield to tell how we reach the idea of
using the English language to help us in the interpretation of
this dream. Suffice it to say that it is again a question of a
little box ( cf. p. 130, the dream of the dead child in the box)
which has been filled so full that nothing more can go into it.
Nothing in the least sinister this time.

In all these “harmless” dreams the sexual factor as a
motive for the exercise of the censor receives striking prominence.
But this is a matter of primary importance, which
we must postpone.

( b ) Infantile Experiences as the Source of Dreams

As the third of the peculiarities of the dream content, we have cited from all the authors (except Robert) the fact that
impressions from the earliest times of our lives, which seem
not to be at the disposal of the waking memory, may appear
in the dream. It is, of course, difficult to judge how often or
how seldom this occurs, because the respective elements of the
dream are not recognised according to their origin after waking.
The proof that we are dealing with childhood impressions must
thus be reached objectively, and the conditions necessary for
this happen to coincide only in rare instances. The story is
told by A. Maury, [48] as being particularly conclusive, of a man
who decided to visit his birthplace after twenty years’ absence.
During the night before his departure, he dreams that he is in
an altogether strange district, and that he there meets a strange
man with whom he has a conversation. Having afterward
returned to his home, he was able to convince himself that
this strange district really existed in the neighbourhood of his
home town, and the strange man in the dream turned out to
be a friend of his dead father who lived there. Doubtless, a
conclusive proof that he had seen both the man and the district
in his childhood. The dream, moreover, is to be interpreted
as a dream of impatience, like that of the girl who
carries her ticket for the concert of the evening in her pocket
(p. 110), of the child whose father had promised him an excursion
to the Hameau, and the like. The motives explaining
why just this impression of childhood is reproduced for the
dreamer cannot, of course, be discovered without an analysis.

One of the attendants at my lectures, who boasted that his
dreams were very rarely subject to disfigurement, told me
that he had sometime before in a dream seen his former tutor
in bed with his nurse , who had been in the household until he
was eleven years old. The location of this scene does not
occur to him in the dream. As he was much interested, he
told the dream to his elder brother, who laughingly confirmed
its reality. The brother said he remembered the affair very
well, for he was at the time six years old. The lovers were in
the habit of making him, the elder boy, drunk with beer,
whenever circumstances were favourable for nocturnal relations.
The smaller child, at that time three years old—our
dreamer—who slept in the same room as the nurse, was not
considered an obstacle.

In still another case it may be definitely ascertained, without
the aid of dream interpretation, that the dream contains
elements from childhood; that is, if it be a so-called perennial dream, which being first dreamt in childhood, later appears
again and again after adult age has been reached. I may add
a few examples of this sort to those already familiar, although
I have never made the acquaintance of such a perennial dream
in my own case. A physician in the thirties tells me that a
yellow lion, about which he can give the most detailed information,
has often appeared in his dream-life from the
earliest period of his childhood to the present day. This lion,
known to him from his dreams, was one day discovered in
natura as a long-forgotten object made of porcelain, and on
that occasion the young man learned from his mother that
this object had been his favourite toy in early childhood, a fact
which he himself could no longer remember.

If we now turn from the manifest dream content to the
dream thoughts which are revealed only upon analysis, the
co-operation of childhood experiences may be found to exist
even in dreams whose content would not have led us to suspect
anything of the sort. I owe a particularly delightful and
instructive example of such a dream to my honoured colleague
of the “yellow lion.” After reading Nansen’s account of his
polar expedition, he dreamt that he was giving the bold explorer
electrical treatment in an ice field for an ischæmia of
which the latter complained! In the analysis of this dream,
he remembered a story of his childhood, without which the
dream remains entirely unintelligible. When he was a child,
three or four years old, he was listening attentively to a conversation
of older people about trips of exploration, and
presently asked papa whether exploration was a severe illness.
He had apparently confused “trips” with “rips,” and the
ridicule of his brothers and sisters prevented his ever forgetting
the humiliating experience.

The case is quite similar when, in the analysis of the dream
of the monograph on the genus cyclamen, I happen upon the
recollection, retained from childhood, that my father allowed
me to destroy a book embellished with coloured plates when I
was a little boy five years old. It will perhaps be doubted
whether this recollection actually took part in the composition of the dream content, and it will be intimated that the process
of analysis has subsequently established the connection. But
the abundance and intricacy of the ties of association vouch
for the truth of my explanation: cyclamen—favourite flower—favourite
dish—artichoke; to pick to pieces like an artichoke,
leaf by leaf (a phrase which at that time rang in our
ears à propos of the dividing up of the Chinese Empire)—herbarium-bookworm,
whose favourite dish is books. I may
state further that the final meaning of the dream, which I
have not given here, has the most intimate connection with
the content of the childhood scene.

In another series of dreams we learn from analysis that the
wish itself, which has given rise to the dream, and whose
fulfilment the dream turns out to be, has originated in childhood—until
one is astonished to find that the child with all its
impulses lives on in the dream.

I shall now continue the interpretation of a dream which has
already proved instructive—I refer to the dream in which
friend R. is my uncle (p. 116). We have carried its interpretation
far enough for the wish-motive, of being appointed professor,
to assert itself tangibly; and we have explained the
affection displayed in the dream for friend R. as a fiction of
opposition and spite against the aspersion of the two colleagues,
who appear in the dream thoughts. The dream was
my own; I may, therefore, continue the analysis by stating
that my feelings were not quite satisfied by the solution
reached. I know that my opinion of these colleagues who are
so badly treated in the dream thoughts would have been
expressed in quite different terms in waking life; the potency
of the wish not to share their fate in the matter of appointment
seemed to me too slight to account for the discrepancy
between my estimate in the dream and that of waking. If
my desire to be addressed by a new title proves so strong it
gives proof of a morbid ambition, which I did not know to
exist in me, and which I believe is far from my thoughts. I
do not know how others, who think they know me, would
judge me, for perhaps I have really been ambitious; but if
this be true, my ambition has long since transferred itself to
other objects than the title and rank of assistant-professor.

Whence, then, the ambition which the dream has ascribed to me? Here I remember a story which I heard often in my
childhood, that at my birth an old peasant’s wife had prophesied
to my happy mother (I was her first-born) that she had
given to the world a great man. Such prophecies must occur
very frequently; there are so many mothers happy in expectation,
and so many old peasant wives whose influence on
earth has waned, and who have therefore turned their eyes
towards the future. The prophetess was not likely to suffer
for it either. Might my hunger for greatness have originated
from this source? But here I recollect an impression from the
later years of my childhood, which would serve still better as
an explanation. It was of an evening at an inn on the Prater, [BA] where my parents were accustomed to take me when I was
eleven or twelve years old. We noticed a man who went
from table to table and improvised verses upon any subject
that was given to him. I was sent to bring the poet to our
table and he showed himself thankful for the message. Before
asking for his subject he threw off a few rhymes about me, and
declared it probable, if he could trust his inspiration, that I
would one day become a “minister.” I can still distinctly
remember the impression made by this second prophecy. It
was at the time of the election for the municipal ministry; my
father had recently brought home pictures of those elected to
the ministry—Herbst, Giskra, Unger, Berger, and others—and
we had illuminated them in honour of these gentlemen.
There were even some Jews among them; every industrious
Jewish schoolboy therefore had the making of a minister in
him. Even the fact that until shortly before my enrolment
in the University I wanted to study jurisprudence, and changed
my plans only at the last moment, must be connected with the
impressions of that time. A minister’s career is under no
circumstances open to a medical man. And now for my
dream! I begin to see that it transplants me from the sombre
present to the hopeful time of the municipal election, and
fulfils my wish of that time to the fullest extent. In treating
my two estimable and learned colleagues so badly, because
they are Jews, the one as a simpleton and the other as a
criminal—in doing this I act as though I were the minister of
education, I put myself in his place. What thorough revenge I take upon his Excellency! He refuses to appoint me professor
extraordinarius, and in return I put myself in his place
in the dream.

Another case establishes the fact that although the wish
which actuates the dream is a present one, it nevertheless draws
great intensification from childhood memories. I refer to a
series of dreams which are based upon the longing to go to
Rome. I suppose I shall still have to satisfy this longing by
means of dreams for a long time to come, because, at the time
of year which is at my disposal for travelling, a stay at Rome
is to be avoided on account of considerations of health. [BB] Thus I once dreamt of seeing the Tiber and the bridge of St.
Angelo from the window of a railroad compartment; then
the train starts, and it occurs to me that I have never entered
the city at all. The view which I saw in the dream was modelled
after an engraving which I had noticed in passing the day
before in the parlour of one of my patients. On another
occasion some one is leading me upon a hill and showing me
Rome half enveloped in mist, and so far in the distance that
I am astonished at the distinctness of the view. The content
of this dream is too rich to be fully reported here. The motive,
“to see the promised land from afar,” is easily recognisable in
it. The city is Lübeck, which I first saw in the mist; the
original of the hill is the Gleichenberg. In a third dream, I am
at last in Rome, as the dream tells me. To my disappointment,
the scenery which I see is anything but urban. A little river
with black water, on one side of which are black rocks, on the
other large white flowers. I notice a certain Mr. Zucker (with
whom I am superficially acquainted), and make up my mind
to ask him to show me the way into the city. It is apparent that
I am trying in vain to see a city in the dream which I have
never seen in waking life. If I resolve the landscape into its
elements, the white flowers indicate Ravenna, which is known
to me, and which, for a time at least, deprived Rome of its
leading place as capital of Italy. In the swamps around
Ravenna we had seen the most beautiful water-lilies in the
middle of black pools of water; the dream makes them grow
on meadows, like the narcissi of our own Aussee, because at Ravenna it was such tedious work to fetch them out of the
water. The black rock, so close to the water, vividly recalls
the valley of the Tepl at Karlsbad. “Karlsbad” now enables
me to account for the peculiar circumstance that I ask Mr.
Zucker the way. In the material of which the dream is composed
appear also two of those amusing Jewish anecdotes,
which conceal so much profound and often bitter worldly
wisdom, and which we are so fond of quoting in our conversation
and letters. One is the story of the “constitution,” and
tells how a poor Jew sneaks into the express train for Karlsbad
without a ticket, how he is caught and is treated more and
more unkindly at each call for tickets by the conductor, and
how he tells a friend, whom he meets at one of the stations
during his miserable journey, and who asks him where he is
travelling: “To Karlsbad, if my constitution will stand it.”
Associated with this in memory is another story about a Jew
who is ignorant of French, and who has express instructions to
ask in Paris for the way to the Rue Richelieu. Paris was for
many years the object of my own longing, and I took the great
satisfaction with which I first set foot on the pavement in
Paris as a warrant that I should also attain the fulfilment of
other wishes. Asking for the way is again a direct allusion
to Rome, for of course all roads lead to Rome. Moreover,
the name Zucker (English, sugar) again points to Karlsbad ,
whither we send all persons afflicted with the constitutional disease, diabetes ( Zuckerkrankheit , sugar-disease). The occasion
for this dream was the proposal of my Berlin friend
that we should meet in Prague at Easter. A further allusion
to sugar and diabetes was to be found in the matters which I
had to talk over with him.

A fourth dream, occurring shortly after the last one mentioned,
brings me back to Rome. I see a street-corner before
me and am astonished to see so many German placards posted
there. On the day before I had written my friend with
prophetic vision that Prague would probably not be a comfortable
resort for German travellers. The dream, therefore,
simultaneously expressed the wish to meet him at Rome
instead of at the Bohemian city, and a desire, which probably
originated during my student days, that the German language
might be accorded more tolerance in Prague. Besides I must have understood the Czech language in the first three years of
my childhood, because I was born in a small village of Moravia,
inhabited by Slavs. A Czech nursery rhyme, which I heard
in my seventeenth year, became, without effort on my part, so
imprinted upon my memory that I can repeat it to this day,
although I have no idea of its meaning. There is then no lack
in these dreams also of manifold relations to impressions from
the first years of my life.

It was during my last journey to Italy, which, among other
places, took me past Lake Trasimenus, that I at last found
what re-enforcement my longing for the Eternal City had
received from the impressions of my youth; this was after I
had seen the Tiber, and had turned back with painful emotions
when I was within eighty kilometers of Rome. I was just
broaching the plan of travelling to Naples via Rome the next
year, when this sentence, which I must have read in one of
our classical authors, occurred to me: “It is a question which
of the two paced up and down in his room the more impatiently
after he had made the plan to go to Rome—Assistant-Headmaster
Winckelman or the great general Hannibal.” I
myself had walked in Hannibal’s footsteps; like him I was
destined never to see Rome, and he too had gone to Campania
after the whole world had expected him in Rome. Hannibal,
with whom I had reached this point of similarity, had been
my favourite hero during my years at the Gymnasium; like so
many boys of my age, I bestowed my sympathies during the
Punic war, not on the Romans, but on the Carthaginians.
Then, when I came finally to understand the consequences of
belonging to an alien race, and was forced by the anti-semitic
sentiment among my class-mates to assume a definite attitude,
the figure of the semitic commander assumed still greater proportions
in my eyes. Hannibal and Rome symbolised for me
as a youth the antithesis between the tenaciousness of the
Jews and the organisation of the Catholic Church. The significance
for our emotional life which the anti-semitic movement
has since assumed helped to fix the thoughts and impressions
of that earlier time. Thus the wish to get to Rome has become
the cover and symbol in my dream-life for several warmly
cherished wishes, for the realisation of which one might work
with the perseverance and single-mindedness of the Punic general, and whose fulfilment sometimes seems as little
favoured by fortune as the wish of Hannibal’s life to enter
Rome.

And now for the first time I happen upon the youthful
experience which, even to-day, still manifests its power in all
these emotions and dreams. I may have been ten or twelve
years old when my father began to take me with him on his
walks, and to reveal to me his views about the things of this
world in his conversation. In this way he once told me, in
order to show into how much better times I had been born
than he, the following: “While I was a young man, I was
walking one Saturday on a street in the village where you
were born; I was handsomely dressed and wore a new fur
cap. Along comes a Christian, who knocks my cap into the
mud with one blow and shouts: “Jew, get off the sidewalk.”
“And what did you do?” “I went into the street and picked
up the cap,” was the calm answer. That did not seem heroic
on the part of the big strong man, who was leading me, a
little fellow, by the hand. I contrasted this situation, which
did not please me, with another more in harmony with my
feelings—the scene in which Hannibal’s father, Hamilcar [BC] Barka made his boy swear at the domestic altar to take
vengeance on the Romans. Since that time Hannibal has
had a place in my phantasies.”

I think I can follow my enthusiasm for the Carthaginian
general still further back into my childhood, so that possibly
we have here the transference of an already formed emotional
relation to a new vehicle. One of the first books which fell
into my childish hands, after I learned to read, was Thiers’ Konsulat und Kaiserreich (Consulship and Empire); I remember
I pasted on the flat backs of my wooden soldiers little
labels with the names of the Imperial marshals, and that at
that time Masséna (as a Jew Menasse) was already my avowed
favourite. Napoleon himself follows Hannibal in crossing the
Alps. And perhaps the development of this martial ideal
can be traced still further back into my childhood, to the wish
which the now friendly, now hostile, intercourse during my first three years with a boy a year older than myself must
have actuated in the weaker of the two playmates.

The deeper one goes in the analysis of dreams, the more
often one is put on the track of childish experiences which
play the part of dream sources in the latent dream
content.

We have learned (p. 16) that the dream very rarely reproduces
experiences in such a manner that they constitute the
sole manifest dream content, unabridged and unchanged.
Still some authentic examples showing this process have been
reported, and I can add some new ones which again refer to
infantile scenes. In the case of one of my patients, a dream
once gave a barely disfigured reproduction of a sexual occurrence,
which was immediately recognised as an accurate
recollection. The memory of it indeed had never been lost
in waking life, but it had been greatly obscured, and its revivification
was a result of the preceding work of analysis. The
dreamer had at the age of twelve visited a bed-ridden schoolmate,
who had exposed himself by a movement in bed, probably
only by chance. At the sight of the genitals, he was
seized by a kind of compulsion, exposed himself and took hold
of the member belonging to the other boy, who, however,
looked at him with surprise and indignation, whereupon he
became embarrassed and let go. A dream repeated this scene
twenty-three years later, with all the details of the emotions
occurring in it, changing it, however, in this respect, that the
dreamer took the passive part instead of the active one,
while the person of the schoolmate was replaced by one
belonging to the present.

As a rule, of course, a childhood scene is represented in the
manifest dream content only by an allusion, and must be
extricated from the dream by means of interpretation. The
citation of examples of this kind cannot have a very convincing
effect, because every guarantee that they are experiences
of childhood is lacking; if they belong to an earlier
time of life, they are no longer recognised by our memory.
Justification for the conclusion that such childish experiences
generally exist in dreams is based upon a great number of
factors which become apparent in psychoanalytical work, and
which seem reliable enough when regarded as a whole. But when, for the purposes of dream interpretation, such references
of dreams to childish experiences are torn from
their context, they will perhaps not make much impression,
especially since I never give all the material upon which the
interpretation depends. However, I shall not let this prevent
me from giving some examples.

I. The following dream is from another female patient: She is in a large room, in which there are all kinds of machines,
perhaps, as she imagines, an orthopædic institute. She hears
that I have no time, and that she must take the treatment along
with five others. But she resists, and is unwilling to lie down on
the bed—or whatever it is—which is intended for her. She stands
in a corner and waits for me to say “It is not true.” The others,
meanwhile, laugh at her, saying it is all foolishness on her part.
At the same time it is as if she were called upon to make many
small squares.

The first part of the content of this dream is an allusion to
the treatment and a transference on me. The second contains
an allusion to a childhood scene; the two portions are connected
by the mention of the bed. The orthopædic institute
refers to one of my talks in which I compared the treatment
as to its duration and nature with an orthopædic treatment.
At the beginning of the treatment I had to tell her that for
the present I had little time for her, but that later on I would
devote a whole hour to her daily. This aroused in her the
old sensitiveness, which is the chief characteristic of children
who are to be hysterical. Their desire for love is insatiable.
My patient was the youngest of six brothers and sisters (hence,
“ with five others ”), and as such the favourite of her father,
but in spite of that she seems to have found that her beloved
father devoted too little time and attention to her. The detail
of her waiting for me to say “It is not true,” has the following
explanation: A tailor’s apprentice had brought her a dress,
and she had given him the money for it. Then she asked her
husband whether she would have to pay the money again if
the boy were to lose it. To tease her, her husband answered
“Yes” (the teasing in the dream), and she asked again and
again, and waited for him to say “ It is not true. ” The thought
of the latent dream-content may now be construed as follows:
Will she have to pay me the double amount if I devote twice the time to her? a thought which is stingy or filthy. (The
uncleanliness of childhood is often replaced in the dream by
greediness for money; the word filthy here supplies the
bridge.) If all that about waiting until I should say, &c.,
serves as a dream circumlocution for the word “filthy,” the
standing-in-a-corner and not lying down-on-the-bed are in
keeping; for these two features are component parts of a
scene of childhood, in which she had soiled her bed, and for
punishment was put into a corner, with the warning that papa
would not love her any more, and her brothers and sisters
laughed at her, &c. The little squares refer to her young
niece, who has shown her the arithmetical trick of writing
figures in nine squares, I believe it is, in such a way that
upon being added together in any direction they make
fifteen.

II. Here is the dream of a man: He sees two boys tussling
with each other, and they are cooper’s boys, as he concludes from
the implements which are lying about; one of the boys has thrown
the other down, the prostrate one wears ear-rings with blue stones.
He hurries after the wrongdoer with lifted cane, in order to
chastise him. The latter takes refuge with a woman who is
standing against a wooden fence, as though it were his mother.
She is the wife of a day labourer, and she turns her back to the
man who is dreaming. At last she faces about and stares at him
with a horrible look, so that he runs away in fright; in her eyes
the red flesh of the lower lid seems to stand out.

The dream has made abundant use of trivial occurrences
of the previous day. The day before he actually saw two boys
on the street, one of whom threw the other one down. When
he hurried up to them in order to settle the quarrel, both of
them took flight. Coopers’ boys: this is explained only by a
subsequent dream, in the analysis of which he used the expression,
“ To knock the bottom out of the barrel. ” Ear-rings
with blue stones, according to his observation, are chiefly
worn by prostitutes. Furthermore, a familiar doggerel rhyme
about two boys comes up: “The other boy, his name was
Mary” (that is, he was a girl). The woman standing up:
after the scene with the two boys, he took a walk on the
bank of the Danube, and took advantage of being alone
to urinate against a wooden fence . A little later during his walk, a decently dressed elderly lady smiled at him
very pleasantly, and wanted to hand him her card with
her address.

Since in the dream the woman stood as he had while
urinating, it is a question of a woman urinating, and this
explains the “horrible look,” and the prominence of the red
flesh, which can only refer to the genitals which gap in squatting.
He had seen genitals in his childhood, and they had
appeared in later recollection as “proud flesh” and as
“wound.” The dream unites two occasions upon which, as
a young boy, the dreamer had had opportunity to see the
genitals of little girls, in throwing one down, and while another
was urinating; and, as is shown by another association, he
had kept in memory a punishment or threat of his father’s,
called forth by the sexual curiosity which the boy manifested
on these occasions.

III. A great mass of childish memories, which have been
hastily united in a phantasy, is to be found behind the following
dream of a young lady.

She goes out in trepidation, in order to do some shopping.
On the Graben [BD] she sinks to her knees as though broken down.
Many people collect around her, especially the hackney-coach
drivers; but no one helps her to get up. She makes many unavailing
attempts; finally she must have succeeded, for she is
put into a hackney-coach which is to take her home. A large,
heavily laden basket (something like a market-basket) is thrown
after her through the window.

This is the same woman who is always harassed in her
dreams as she was harassed when a child. The first situation
of the dream is apparently taken from seeing a horse that
had fallen, just as “broken down” points to horse-racing.
She was a rider in her early years, still earlier she was probably
also a horse. Her first childish memory of the seventeen-year-old
son of the porter, who, being seized on the street by
an epileptic fit, was brought home in a coach, is connected
with the idea of falling down. Of this, of course, she has only
heard, but the idea of epileptic fits and of falling down has
obtained great power over her phantasies, and has later influenced
the form of her own hysterical attacks. When a person of the female sex dreams of falling, this almost regularly
has a sexual significance; she becomes a “fallen
woman,” and for the purpose of the dream under consideration
this interpretation is probably the least doubtful, for she
falls on the Graben, the place in Vienna which is known as
the concourse of prostitutes. The market-basket admits of
more than one interpretation; in the sense of refusal (German, Korb = basket—snub, refusal), she remembers the many snubs
which she first gave her suitors, and which she later, as she
thinks, received herself. Here belongs also the detail that no one will help her up , which she herself interprets as being
disdained. Furthermore, the market-basket recalls phantasies
that have already appeared in the course of analysis, in which
she imagines she has married far beneath her station, and
now goes marketing herself. But lastly the market-basket
might be interpreted as the mark of a servant. This suggests
further childhood memories—of a cook who was sent away
because she stole; she, too, sank to her knees and begged for
mercy. The dreamer was at that time twelve years old.
Then there is a recollection of a chamber-maid, who was
dismissed because she had an affair with the coachman of
the household, who, incidentally, married her afterwards.
This recollection, therefore, gives us a clue to the coachman
in the dream (who do not, in contrast with what is actually
the case, take the part of the fallen woman). But there still
remains to be explained the throwing of the basket, and the
throwing of it through the window. This takes her to the
transference of baggage on the railroad, to the Fensterln , [BE] in the country, and to minor impressions received at a country
resort, of a gentleman throwing some blue plums to a lady
through her window, and of the dreamer’s little sister being
frightened because a cretin who was passing looked in at the
window. And now from behind this there emerges an obscure
recollection, from her tenth year, of a nurse who made love at
the country resort with a servant of the household, of which the child had opportunity to see something, and who was
“fired” (thrown out) (in the dream the opposite: “thrown
into”), a story which we had also approached by several
other paths. The baggage, moreover, or the trunk of a servant,
is disparagingly referred to in Vienna as “seven plums.”
“Pack up your seven plums and get out.”

My collection, of course, contains an abundant supply of
such patients’ dreams, whose analysis leads to childish impressions
that are remembered obscurely or not at all, and
that often date back to the first three years of life. But it is
a mistake to draw conclusions from them which are to apply
to the dream in general; we are in every case dealing with
neurotic, particularly with hysterical persons; and the part
played by childhood scenes in these dreams might be conditioned
by the nature of the neurosis, and not by that of the
dream. However, I am struck quite as often in the course of
interpreting my own dreams, which I do not do on account of
obvious symptoms of disease, by the fact that I unsuspectingly
come upon a scene of childhood in the latent dream content,
and that a whole series of dreams suddenly falls into line with
conclusions drawn from childish experiences. I have already
given examples of this, and shall give still more upon various
occasions. Perhaps I cannot close the whole chapter more
fittingly than by citing several of my own dreams, in which
recent happenings and long-forgotten experiences of childhood
appear together as sources of dreams.

I. After I have been travelling and have gone to bed
hungry and tired, the great necessities of life begin to assert
their claims in sleep, and I dream as follows: I go into a
kitchen to order some pastry. Here three women are standing,
one of whom is the hostess, and is turning something in her hand
as though she were making dumplings. She answers that I
must wait until she has finished (not distinctly as a speech). I become impatient and go away insulted. I put on an overcoat;
but the first one which I try is too long. I take it off, and am
somewhat astonished to find that it has fur trimming. A second
one has sewn into it a long strip of cloth with Turkish drawings.
A stranger with a long face and a short pointed beard comes up
and prevents me from putting it on, declaring that it belongs to
him. I now show him that it is embroidered all over in Turkish fashion. He asks, “What business are the Turkish (drawings,
strips of cloth ...) of yours?” But we then become quite
friendly with each other.

In the analysis of this dream there occurs to me quite
unexpectedly the novel which I read, that is to say, which I
began with the end of the first volume, when I was perhaps
thirteen years old. I have never known the name of the novel
or of its author, but the conclusion remains vividly in my
memory. The hero succumbs to insanity, and continually
calls the names of the three women that have signified the
greatest good and ill fortune for him during life. Pélagie is
one of these names. I still do not know what to make of
this name in the analysis. À propos of the three women there
now come to the surface the three Parcæ who spin the fate of
man, and I know that one of the three women, the hostess
in the dream, is the mother who gives life, and who, moreover,
as in my case, gives the first nourishment to the living creature.
Love and hunger meet at the mother’s breast. A young man—so
runs an anecdote—who became a great admirer of womanly
beauty, once when the conversation turned upon a beautiful
wet nurse who had nourished him as a child, expressed himself
to the effect that he was sorry that he had not taken better
advantage of his opportunity at the time. I am in the habit
of using the anecdote to illustrate the factor of subsequence
in the mechanism of psychoneuroses.... One of the Parcæ,
then, is rubbing the palms of her hands together as though she
were making dumplings. A strange occupation for one of
the Fates, which is urgently in need of an explanation! This
is now found in another and earlier childhood memory. When
I was six years old, and was receiving my first instructions from
my mother, I was asked to believe that we are made of earth,
and that therefore we must return to earth. But this did not
suit me, and I doubted her teaching. Thereupon my mother
rubbed the palms of her hands together—just as in making
dumplings, except that there was no dough between them—and
showed me the blackish scales of epidermis which were
thus rubbed off as a proof that it is earth of which we are
made. My astonishment at this demonstration ad oculos was without limit, and I acquiesced in the idea which I was
later to hear expressed in words: “Thou owest nature a death.” [BF] Thus the women are really Parcæ whom I visit
in the kitchen, as I have done so often in my childhood years
when I was hungry, and when my mother used to order me to
wait until lunch was ready. And now for the dumplings!
At least one of my teachers at the University, the very one
to whom I am indebted for my histological knowledge
(epidermis), might be reminded by the name Knoedl (German, Knoedel = dumplings) of a person whom he had to prosecute
for committing a plagiarism of his writings. To commit
plagiarism, to appropriate anything one can get, even though
it belongs to another, obviously leads to the second part of
the dream, in which I am treated like a certain overcoat thief,
who for a time plied his trade in the auditoria. I wrote down
the expression plagiarism—without any reason—because it
presented itself to me, and now I perceive that it must belong
to the latent dream-content, because it will serve as a bridge
between different parts of the manifest dream-content. The
chain of associations—Pélagie—plagiarism—plagiostomi [BG] (sharks)—fish bladder—connects the old novel with the affair
of Knoedl and with the overcoats (German, Überzieher = thing
drawn over—overcoat or condom), which obviously refer to
an object belonging to the technique of sexual life. [BH] This, it is
true, is a very forced and irrational connection, but it is
nevertheless one which I could not establish in waking life
if it had not been already established by the activity of the
dream. Indeed, as though nothing were sacred for this
impulse to force connections, the beloved name, Bruecke
(bridge of words, see above), now serves to remind me of the
institution in which I spent my happiest hours as a student,
quite without any cares (“So you will ever find more pleasure
at the breasts of knowledge without measure”), in the most
complete contrast to the urgent desires which vex me while I
dream. And finally there comes to the surface the recollection
of another dear teacher, whose name again sounds like something to eat (Fleischl—German, Fleisch = meat—like
Knoedl), and of a pathetic scene, in which the scales of epidermis
play a part (mother—hostess), and insanity (the novel), and
a remedy from the Latin kitchen which numbs the sensation
of hunger, to wit, cocaine.

In this manner I could follow the intricate trains of thought
still further, and could fully explain the part of the dream
which is missing in the analysis; but I must refrain, because
the personal sacrifices which it would require are too great.
I shall merely take up one of the threads, which will serve to
lead us directly to the dream thoughts that lie at the bottom
of the confusion. The stranger, with the long face and
pointed beard, who wants to prevent me from putting on
the overcoat, has the features of a tradesman at Spalato, of
whom my wife made ample purchases of Turkish cloths. His
name was Popovic̓, a suspicious name, which, by the way,
has given the humorist Stettenheim a chance to make a
significant remark: “He told me his name, and blushingly
shook my hand.” [BI] Moreover, there is the same abuse of
names as above with Pélagie, Knoedl, Bruecke, Fleischl.
That such playing with names is childish nonsense can be
asserted without fear of contradiction; if I indulge in it,
this indulgence amounts to an act of retribution, for my own
name has numberless times fallen a victim to such weak-minded
attempts at humour. Goethe once remarked how
sensitive a man is about his name with which, as with his skin,
he feels that he has grown up, whereupon Herder composed
the following on his name:

I perceive that this digression about the abuse of names
was only intended to prepare for this complaint. But let us
stop here.... The purchase at Spalato reminds me of
another one at Cattaro, where I was too cautious, and missed
an opportunity for making some desirable acquisitions.
(Missing an opportunity at the breast of the nurse, see above.)
Another dream thought, occasioned in the dreamer by the
sensation of hunger, is as follows: One should let nothing which one can have escape, even if a little wrong is done; no
opportunity should be missed, life is so short, death inevitable. Owing to the fact that this also has a sexual significance, and
that desire is unwilling to stop at a wrong, this philosophy
of carpe diem must fear the censor and must hide behind a
dream. This now makes articulate counter-thoughts of all
kinds, recollections of a time when spiritual food alone was
sufficient for the dreamer; it suggests repressions of every
kind, and even threats of disgusting sexual punishments.

II. A second dream requires a longer preliminary statement:

I have taken a car to the West Station in order to begin a
vacation journey to the Aussee, and I reach the station in
time for the train to Ischl, which leaves earlier. Here I see
Count Thun, who is again going to see the Emperor at Ischl.
In spite of the rain, he has come in an open carriage, has
passed out at once through the door for local trains, and has
motioned back the gate-keeper, who does not know him and
who wants to take his ticket, with a little wave of his hand.
After the train to Ischl has left, I am told to leave the platform
and go back into the hot waiting-room; but with difficulty
I secure permission to remain. I pass the time in watching
the people who make use of bribes to secure a compartment;
I make up my mind to insist on my rights—that is, to demand
the same privilege. Meanwhile I sing something to myself,
which I afterwards recognise to be the aria from Figaro’s
Wedding:

(Possibly another person would not have recognised the
song.)

During the whole afternoon I have been in an insolent,
combative mood; I have spoken roughly to the waiter and
the cabman, I hope without hurting their feelings; now all
kinds of bold and revolutionary thoughts come into my head,
of a kind suited to the words of Figaro and the comedy of
Beaumarchais, which I had seen at the Comédie Française. The speech about great men who had taken the trouble to be
born; the aristocratic prerogative, which Count Almaviva
wants to apply in the case of Susan; the jokes which our
malicious journalists of the Opposition make upon the name
of Count Thun (German, thun = doing) by calling him Count
Do-Nothing. I really do not envy him; he has now a difficult
mission with the Emperor, and I am the real Count Do-Nothing,
for I am taking a vacation. With this, all kinds of cheerful
plans for the vacation. A gentleman now arrives who is
known to me as a representative of the Government at the
medical examinations, and who has won the flattering nickname
of “Governmental bed-fellow” by his activities in this
capacity. By insisting on his official station he secures half
of a first-class compartment, and I hear one guard say to the
other: “Where are we going to put the gentleman with the
first-class half-compartment?” A pretty favouritism; I
am paying for a whole first-class compartment. Now I get
a whole compartment for myself, but not in a through coach,
so that there is no toilet at my disposal during the night.
My complaints to the guard are without result; I get even
by proposing that at least there be a hole made in the floor of
this compartment for the possible needs of the travellers. I
really awake at a quarter of three in the morning with a desire
to urinate, having had the following dream:

Crowd of people, meeting of students.... A certain
Count (Thun or Taafe) is making a speech. Upon being asked
to say something about the Germans, he declares with contemptuous
mien that their favourite flower is Colt’s-foot, and then puts something
like a torn leaf, really the crumpled skeleton of a leaf, into
his buttonhole. I make a start, I make a start then, [BJ] but I am
surprised at this idea of mine. Then more indistinctly: It
seems as though it were the vestibule (Aula), the exits are jammed,
as though it were necessary to flee. I make my way through a
suite of handsomely furnished rooms, apparently governmental
chambers, with furniture of a colour which is between brown and
violet, and at last I come to a passage where a housekeeper, an
elderly, fat woman (Frauenzimmer), is seated. I try to avoid talking to her, but apparently she thinks I have a right to pass
because she asks whether she shall accompany me with the lamp.
I signify to her to tell her that she is to remain standing on the
stairs, and in this I appear to myself very clever, for avoiding
being watched at last. I am downstairs now, and I find a narrow,
steep way along which I go.

Again indistinctly.... It is as if my second task were to
get away out of the city, as my earlier was to get out of the house.
I am riding in a one-horse carriage, and tell the driver to take me
to a railway station. “I cannot ride with you on the tracks,” I
say, after he has made the objection that I have tired him out.
Here it seems as though I had already driven with him along a
course which is ordinarily traversed on the railroad. The stations are
crowded; I consider whether I shall go to Krems or to Znaim, but I
think that the court will be there, and I decide in favour of Graz or
something of the sort. Now I am seated in the coach, which is something
like a street-car, and I have in my buttonhole a long braided
thing, on which are violet-brown violets of stiff material, which
attracts the attention of many people. Here the scene breaks off.

I am again in front of the railroad station, but I am with a elderly
gentleman. I invent a scheme for remaining unrecognised, but I also
see this plan already carried out. Thinking and experiencing are
here, as it were, the same thing. He pretends to be blind, at least in
one eye, and I hold a male urinal in front of him (which we have
had to buy in the city or did buy), I am thus a sick attendant, and
have to give him the urinal because he is blind. If the conductor
sees us in this position, he must pass us by without drawing attention.
At the same time the attitude of the person mentioned is
visually observed. Then I awake with a desire to urinate.

The whole dream seems a sort of phantasy, which takes the
dreamer back to the revolutionary year 1848, the memory of
which had been renewed by the anniversary year 1898, as well
as by a little excursion to Wachau, where I had become acquainted
with Emmersdorf, a town which I wrongly supposed
to be the resting-place of the student leader Fischof, to whom
several features of the dream content might refer. The
thought associations then lead me to England, to the house of
my brother, who was accustomed jokingly to tell his wife of
“Fifty years ago,” according to the title of a poem by Lord
Tennyson, whereupon the children were in the habit of correcting: “Fifteen years ago.” This phantasy, however, which
subtilely attaches itself to the thoughts which the sight of the
Count Thun has given rise to, is only like the façade of Italian
churches which is superimposed without being organically
connected with the building behind it; unlike these façades,
however, the phantasy is filled with gaps and confused, and
the parts from within break through at many places. The
first situation of the dream is concocted from several scenes,
into which I am able to separate it. The arrogant attitude of
the Count in the dream is copied from a scene at the Gymnasium
which took place in my fifteenth year. We had contrived
a conspiracy against an unpopular and ignorant teacher, the
leading spirit in which was a schoolmate who seems to have
taken Henry VIII. of England as his model. It fell to me to
carry out the coup-d’état , and a discussion of the importance
of the Danube (German Donau ) for Austria (Wachau!) was
the occasion upon which matters came to open indignation.
A fellow-conspirator was the only aristocratic schoolmate
whom we had—he was called the “giraffe” on account of his
conspicuous longitudinal development—and he stood just like
the Count in the dream, while he was being reprimanded by
the tyrant of the school, the Professor of the German language.
The explanation of the favourite flower and the putting into
the buttonhole of something which again must have been a
flower (which recalls the orchids, which I had brought to a
lady friend on the same day, and besides that the rose of
Jericho) prominently recalls the scene in Shakespeare’s historical
plays which opens the civil wars of the Red and the
White Roses; the mention of Henry VIII. has opened the
way to this reminiscence. It is not very far now from roses
to red and white carnations. Meanwhile two little rhymes,
the one German, the other Spanish, insinuate themselves into
the analysis: “Roses, tulips, carnations, all flowers fade,”
and “ Isabelita, no llores que se marchitan las flores. ” The
Spanish is taken from Figaro . Here in Vienna white carnations
have become the insignia of the Anti-Semites, the
red ones of the Social Democrats. Behind this is the recollection
of an anti-Semitic challenge during a railway trip in
beautiful Saxony (Anglo-Saxon). The third scene contributing
to the formation of the first situation in the dream takes place in my early student life. There was a discussion in the
German students’ club about the relation of philosophy to the
general sciences. A green youth, full of the materialistic
doctrine, I thrust myself forward and defended a very one-sided
view. Thereupon a sagacious older school-fellow, who
has since shown his capacity for leading men and organising
the masses, and who, moreover, bears a name belonging to
the animal kingdom, arose and called us down thoroughly;
he too, he said, had herded swine in his youth, and had come
back repentant to the house of his father. I started up (as
in the dream), became very uncivil, and answered that since
I knew he had herded swine, I was not surprised at the tone of
his discourse. (In the dream I am surprised at my national
German sentiment.) There was great commotion; and the
demand came from all sides that I take back what I had said,
but I remained steadfast. The man who had been insulted
was too sensible to take the advice, which was given him, to
send a challenge, and let the matter drop.

The remaining elements of this scene of the dream are of
more remote origin. What is the meaning of the Count’s
proclaiming the colt’s foot? Here I must consult my train
of associations. Colt’s-foot (German: Huflattich )—lattice—lettuce—salad-dog
(the dog that grudges others what he cannot
eat himself). Here plenty of opprobrious epithets may be
discerned: Gir-affe (German Affe = monkey, ape), pig, sow,
dog; I might even find means to arrive at donkey, on a detour
by way of a name, and thus again at contempt for an academic
teacher. Furthermore I translate colt’s-foot ( Huflattich )—I
do not know how correctly—by “pisse-en-lit.” I got this
idea from Zola’s Germinal , in which children are ordered to
bring salad of this kind. The dog— chien —has a name sounding
like the major function ( chier , as pisser stands for the
minor one). Now we shall soon have before us the indecent
in all three of its categories; for in the same Germinal , which
has a lot to do with the future revolution there is described
a very peculiar contest, depending upon the production of
gaseous excretions, called flatus. [BK] And now I must remark how the way to this flatus has been for a long while preparing,
beginning with the flowers, and proceeding to the Spanish
rhyme of Isabelita to Ferdinand and Isabella, and, by way of
Henry VIII., to English history at the time of the expedition
of the Armada against England, after the victorious termination
of which the English struck a medal with the inscription:
“ Afflavit et dissipati sunt ,” for the storm had
scattered the Spanish fleet. I had thought of taking this
phrase for the title of a chapter on “Therapeutics”—to
be meant half jokingly—if I should ever have occasion to
give a detailed account of my conception and treatment
of hysteria.

I cannot give such a detailed solution of the second scene
of the dream, out of regard for the censor. For at this point
I put myself in the place of a certain eminent gentleman of
that revolutionary period, who also had an adventure with an
eagle, who is said to have suffered from incontinence of the
bowels, and the like; and I believe I should not be justified at
this point in passing the censor, although it was an aulic
councillor ( aula , consilarius aulicus ) who told me the greater
part of these stories. The allusion to the suite of rooms in
the dream relates to the private car of his Excellency, into
which I had opportunity to look for a moment; but it signifies,
as so often in dreams, a woman ( Frauenzimmer ; German Zimmer —room is appended to Frauen —woman, in order to
imply a slight amount of contempt). [BL] In the person of the
housekeeper I give scant recognition to an intelligent elderly
lady for the entertainment and the many good stories which I
have enjoyed at her house.... The feature of the lamp goes
back to Grillparzer, who notes a charming experience of a
similar nature, which he afterwards made use of in “Hero and
Leander” (the billows of the ocean and of love—the Armada
and the storm). [BM]

I must also forgo detailed analysis of the two remaining
portions of the dream; I shall select only those elements which lead to two childhood scenes, for the sake of which alone
I have taken up the dream. The reader will guess that it is
sexual matter which forces me to this suppression; but he
need not be content with this explanation. Many things
which must be treated as secrets in the presence of others are
not treated as such with one’s self, and here it is not a question
of considerations inducing me to hide the solution, but of
motives of the inner censor concealing the real content of the
dream from myself. I may say, then, that the analysis shows
these three portions of the dream to be impertinent boasting,
the exuberance of an absurd grandiose idea which has long
since been suppressed in my waking life, which, however, dares
show itself in the manifest dream content by one or two projections
( I seem clever to myself ), and which makes the arrogant
mood of the evening before the dream perfectly intelligible.
It is boasting, indeed, in all departments; thus the mention
of Graz refers to the phrase: What is the price of Graz?
which we are fond of using when we feel over-supplied with
money. Whoever will recall Master Rabelais’s unexcelled
description of the “Life and Deeds of Gargantua and his Son
Pantagruel,” will be able to supply the boastful content intimated
in the first portion of the dream. The following belongs
to the two childhood scenes which have been promised. I had
bought a new trunk for this journey, whose colour, a brownish
violet, appears in the dream several times. (Violet-brown
violets made of stiff material, next to a thing which is called
“girl-catcher”—the furniture in the governmental chambers).
That something new attracts people’s attention is a well-known
belief of children. Now I have been told the following
story of my childhood; I remember hearing the story rather
than the occurrence itself. I am told that at the age of two
I still occasionally wetted my bed, that I was often reproached
on this subject, and that I consoled my father by promising
to buy him a beautiful new red bed in N. (the nearest large
city). (Hence the detail inserted in the dream that we bought
the urinal in the city or had to buy it ; one must keep one’s
promises. Attention is further called to the identity of the
male urinal and the feminine trunk, box). All the megalomania
of the child is contained in this promise. The significance
of the dream of difficulty in urinating in the case of the child has been already considered in the interpretation of an
earlier dream ( cf. the dream on p. 145).

Now there was another domestic occurrence, when I was
seven or eight years old, which I remember very well. One
evening, before going to bed I had disregarded the dictates of
discretion not to satisfy my wants in the bedroom of my
parents and in their presence, and in his reprimand for this
delinquency my father made the remark: “That boy will
never amount to anything.” It must have terribly mortified
my ambition, for allusions to this scene return again and again
in my dreams, and are regularly coupled with enumerations
of my accomplishments and successes, as though I wanted to
say: “You see, I have amounted to something after all.”
Now this childhood scene furnishes the elements for the last
image of the dream, in which of course, the rôles are interchanged
for the sake of revenge. The elderly man, obviously
my father, for the blindness in one eye signifies his glaucoma [BN] on one side is now urinating before me as I once urinated before
him. In glaucoma I refer to cocaine, which stood my father in
good stead in his operation, as though I had thereby fulfilled
my promises. Besides that I make sport of him; since he is
blind I must hold the urinal in front of him, and I gloat over
allusions to my discoveries in the theory of hysteria, of which
I am so proud. [BO]

If the two childhood scenes of urinating are otherwise
closely connected with the desire for greatness, their rehabilitation
on the trip to the Aussee was further favoured by the
accidental circumstance that my compartment had no water-closet,
and that I had to expect embarrassment on the ride as
actually happened in the morning. I awoke with the sensation
of a bodily need. I suppose one might be inclined to credit
these sensations with being the actual stimulus of the dream;
I should, however, prefer a different conception—namely,
that it was the dream thoughts which gave rise to the desire
to urinate. It is quite unusual for me to be disturbed in sleep
by any need, at least at the time of this awakening, a quarter
of four in the morning. I may forestall further objection by
remarking that I have hardly ever felt a desire to urinate
after awakening early on other journeys made under more
comfortable circumstances. Moreover, I can leave this point
undecided without hurting my argument.

Since I have learned, further, from experience in dream
analysis that there always remain important trains of thought
proceeding from dreams whose interpretation at first seems
complete (because the sources of the dream and the actuation
of the wish are easily demonstrable), trains of thought reaching
back into earliest childhood, I have been forced to ask myself
whether this feature does not constitute an essential condition
of dreaming. If I were to generalise this thesis, a connection
with what has been recently experienced would form a part of the manifest content of every dream and a connection with
what has been most remotely experienced, of its latent content;
and I can actually show in the analysis of hysteria that in a
true sense these remote experiences have remained recent up
to the present time. But this conjecture seems still very
difficult to prove; I shall probably have to return to the part
played by the earliest childhood experiences, in another connection
(Chapter VII.).

Of the three peculiarities of dream memory considered at
the beginning, one—the preference for the unimportant in
the dream content—has been satisfactorily explained by tracing
it back to dream disfigurement. We have been able to establish
the existence of the other two—the selection of recent and
of infantile material—but we have found it impossible to
explain them by the motive of dream. Let us keep in mind
these two characteristics, which still remain to be explained
or evaluated; a place for them will have to be found elsewhere,
either in the psychology of the sleeping state, or in the
discussion of the structure of the psychic apparatus which we
shall undertake later, after we have learned that the inner
nature of the apparatus may be observed through dream
interpretation as though through a window.

Just here I may emphasize another result of the last few
dream analyses. The dream often appears ambiguous; not
only may several wish-fulfilments, as the examples show, be
united in it, but one meaning or one wish-fulfilment may also
conceal another, until at the bottom one comes upon the
fulfilment of a wish from the earliest period of childhood; and
here too, it may be questioned whether “often” in this sentence
may not more correctly be replaced by “regularly.”

( c ) Somatic Sources of Dreams

If the attempt be made to interest the cultured layman in
the problems of dreaming, and if, with this end in view, he be
asked the question from what source dreams originate according
to his opinion, it is generally found that the person thus interrogated
thinks himself in assured possession of a part of the
solution. He immediately thinks of the influence which a
disturbed or impeded digestion (“Dreams come from the stomach”), accidental bodily position, and little occurrences
during sleep, exercise upon the formation of dreams, and he
seems not to suspect that even after the consideration of all
these factors there still remains something unexplained.

We have explained at length in the introductory chapter
(p. 16), what a rôle in the formation of dreams the scientific
literature credits to the account of somatic exciting sources,
so that we need here only recall the results of this investigation.
We have seen that three kinds of somatic exciting
sources are distinguished, objective sensory stimuli which
proceed from external objects, the inner states of excitation
of the sensory organs having only a subjective basis, and the
bodily stimuli which originate internally; and we have noticed
the inclination on the part of the authors to force the psychic
sources of the dream into the background or to disregard them
altogether in favour of these somatic sources of stimulation
(p. 32).

In testing the claims which are made on behalf of these
classes of somatic sources of stimulation, we have discovered
that the significance of the objective stimuli of the sensory
organs—whether accidental stimuli during sleep or those
stimuli which cannot be excluded from our dormant psychic
life—has been definitely established by numerous observations
and is confirmed by experiments (p. 18); we have seen that
the part played by subjective sensory stimuli appears to be
demonstrated by the return of hypnogogic sensory images in
dreams, and that although the referring of these dream images
and ideas, in the broadest sense, to internal bodily stimulation
is not demonstrable in every detail, it can be supported by the
well-known influence which an exciting state of the digestive,
urinary, and sexual organs exercise upon the contents of our
dreams.

“Nerve stimulus” and “bodily stimulus,” then, would be
the somatic sources of the dream—that is, the only sources
whatever of the dream, according to several authors.

But we have already found a number of doubts, which seem
to attack not so much the correctness of the somatic theory of
stimulation as its adequacy.

However certain all the representatives of this theory may
have felt about the actual facts on which it is based—especially in case of the accidental and external nerve stimuli, which
may be recognised in the content of the dream without any
trouble—nevertheless none of them has been able to avoid
the admission that the abundant ideal content of dreams does
not admit of explanation by external nerve-stimuli alone.
Miss Mary Whiton Calkins [12] has tested her own dreams and
those of another person for a period of six weeks with this idea
in mind, and has found only from 13·2 per cent. to 6·7 per cent.
in which the element of external sensory perception was
demonstrable; only two cases in the collection could be referred
to organic sensations. Statistics here confirm what a
hasty glance at our own experience might have led us to
suspect.

The decision has been made repeatedly to distinguish the
“dream of nerve stimulus” from the other forms of the
dream as a well-established sub-species. Spitta [64] divided
dreams into dreams of nerve stimulus and association dreams.
But the solution clearly remained unsatisfactory as long as
the link between the somatic sources of dreams and their
ideal content could not be demonstrated.

Besides the first objection, of the inadequate frequency of
external exciting sources, there arises as a second objection the
inadequate explanation of dreams offered by the introduction
of this sort of dream sources. The representatives of the
theory accordingly must explain two things, in the first place,
why the external stimulus in the dream is never recognised
according to its real nature, but is regularly mistaken for
something else ( cf. the alarm-clock dreams, p. 22), and secondly,
why the reaction of the receiving mind to this misrecognised
stimulus should result so indeterminately and changefully.
As an answer to these questions, we have heard from Strümpell [66] that the mind, as a result of its being turned away from the
outer world during sleep, is not capable of giving correct interpretation
to the objective sensory stimulus, but is forced to
form illusions on the basis of the indefinite incitements from
many directions. As expressed in his own words (p. 108):

“As soon as a sensation, a sensational complex, a feeling,
or a psychic process in general, arises in the mind during sleep
from an outer or inner nerve-stimulus, and is perceived by the
mind, this process calls up sensory images, that is to say, earlier perceptions, either unembellished or with the psychic
values belonging to them, from the range of waking experiences,
of which the mind has remained in possession. It
seems to collect about itself, as it were, a greater or less number
of such images, from which the impression which originates
from the nerve-stimulus receives its psychic value. It is
usually said here, as the idiom does of waking thought, that
the mind interprets impressions of nerve-stimuli in sleep. The
result of this interpretation is the so-called nerve-stimulus
dream—that is to say, a dream whose composition is conditioned
by the fact that a nerve-stimulus brings about its
effect in psychic life according to the laws of reproduction.”

The opinion of Wundt [76] agrees in all essentials with this
theory. He says that the ideas in the dream are probably
the result, for the most part, of sensory stimuli, especially of
those of general sensation, and are therefore mostly phantastic
illusions—probably memory presentations which are only
partly pure, and which have been raised to hallucinations.
Strümpell has found an excellent simile (p. 84). It is as “if
the ten fingers of a person ignorant of music should stray over
the keyboard of an instrument”—to illustrate the relation
between dream content and dream stimuli, which follows from
this theory. The implication is that the dream does not
appear as a psychic phenomenon, originating from psychic
motives, but as the result of a physiological stimulus, which is
expressed in psychic symptomology, because the apparatus
which is affected by the stimulus is not capable of any other
expression. Upon a similar assumption is based, for example,
the explanation of compulsive ideas which Meynert tried to
give by means of the famous simile of the dial on which individual
figures are prominent because they are in more
marked relief.

However popular this theory of somatic dream stimuli
may have become, and however seductive it may seem, it is
nevertheless easy to show the weak point in it. Every
somatic dream stimulus which provokes the psychic apparatus
to interpretation through the formation of illusions, is capable
of giving rise to an incalculable number of such attempts at
interpretation; it can thus attain representation in the
dream content by means of an extraordinary number of different ideas. But the theory of Strümpell and Wundt is
incapable of instancing any motive which has control over the
relation between the external stimulus and the dream idea
which has been selected to interpret it, and therefore of
explaining the “peculiar choice” which the stimuli “often
enough make in the course of their reproductive activity”
(Lipps, Grundtatsachen des Seelenlebens , p. 170). Other objections
may be directed against the fundamental assumption
of the whole theory of illusions—the assumption that during
sleep the mind is not in a condition to recognise the real nature
of the objective sensory stimuli. The old physiologist Burdach [8] proves to us that the mind is quite capable even during sleep
of interpreting correctly the sensory impressions which reach
it, and of reacting in accordance with the correct interpretation.
He establishes this by showing that it is possible to exempt
certain impressions which seem important to the individuals,
from the neglect of sleeping (nurse and child), and that one is
more surely awakened by one’s own name than by an indifferent
auditory impression, all of which presupposes, of
course, that the mind distinguishes among sensations, even in
sleep (Chapter I., p. 41). Burdach infers from these observations
that it is not an incapability of interpreting sensory
stimuli in the sleeping state which must be assumed, but a
lack of interest in them. The same arguments which Burdach
used in 1830, later reappear unchanged in the works of Lipps
in the year 1883, where they are employed for the purpose of
attacking the theory of somatic stimuli. According to this
the mind seems to be like the sleeper in the anecdote, who,
upon being asked, “Are you asleep?” answers “No,” and
upon being again addressed with the words, “Then lend me
ten florins,” takes refuge in the excuse: “I am asleep.”

The inadequacy of the theory of somatic dream stimuli
may also be demonstrated in another manner. Observations
show that I am not urged to dream by external stimulations,
even if these stimulations appear in the dream as soon as, and
in case that, I dream. In response to the tactile or pressure
stimulus which I get while sleeping, various reactions are at
my disposal. I can overlook it and discover only upon awakening
that my leg has been uncovered or my arm under pressure;
pathology shows the most numerous examples where powerfully acting sensory and motor stimuli of different sorts remain
without effect during sleep. I can perceive a sensation during
sleep through and through sleep, as it were, which happens
as a rule with painful stimuli, but without weaving the pain
into the texture of the dream; thirdly, I can awaken on
account of the stimulus in order to obviate it. Only as a fourth
possible reaction, I may be impelled to dream by a nerve
stimulus; but the other possibilities are realised at least as
often as that of dream formation. This could not be the case
if the motive for dreaming did not lie outside of the somatic
sources of dreams .

Taking proper account of the defect in the explanation of
dreams by somatic stimuli which has just been shown, other
authors—Scherner, [58] who was joined by the philosopher
Volkelt [72] —have tried to determine more exactly the psychic
activities which cause the variegated dream images to arise
from the somatic stimuli, and have thus transferred the
essential nature of dreams back to the province of the mind,
and to that of psychic activity. Scherner not only gave a
poetically appreciative, glowing and vivid description of the
psychic peculiarities which develop in the course of dream
formation; he also thought he had guessed the principle
according to which the mind proceeds with the stimuli that
are at its disposal. The dream activity, according to Scherner—after
phantasy has been freed from the shackles imposed
upon it during the day, and has been given free rein—strives
to represent symbolically the nature of the organ from which
the stimulus proceeds. Thus we have a kind of dream-book
as a guide for the interpretation of dreams, by means of which
bodily sensations, the conditions of the organs and of the
stimuli may be inferred from dream images. “Thus the
image of a cat expresses an angry discontented mood, the
image of a light-coloured bit of smooth pastry the nudity of
the body. The human body as a whole is pictured as a house
by the phantasy of the dream, and each individual organ of
the body as a part of the house. In ‘toothache-dreams’ a
high vaulted vestibule corresponds to the mouth and a stair
to the descent of the gullet to the alimentary canal; in the
‘headache-dream’ the ceiling of a room which is covered
with disgusting reptile-like spiders is chosen to denote the upper part of the head” (Volkelt, p. 39). “Several different
symbols are used by the dream for the same organ, thus the
breathing lungs find their symbol in an oven filled with flames
and with a roaring draught, the heart in hollow chests and
baskets, and the bladder in round, bag-shaped objects or
anything else hollow. It is especially important that at the
end of a dream the stimulating organ or its function be represented
undisguised and usually on the dreamer’s own body.
Thus the ‘toothache-dream’ usually ends by the dreamer
drawing a tooth from his own mouth” (p. 35). It cannot be
said that this theory has found much favour with the authors.
Above all, it seems extravagant; there has been no inclination
even to discover the small amount of justification to which it
may, in my opinion, lay claim. As may be seen, it leads to a
revival of the dream interpretation by means of symbolism,
which the ancients used, except that the source from which
the interpretation is to be taken is limited to the human body.
The lack of a technique of interpretation which is scientifically
comprehensible must seriously limit the applicability of
Scherner’s theory. Arbitrariness in dream interpretation
seems in no wise excluded, especially since a stimulus may be
expressed by several representations in the content of the
dream; thus Scherner’s associate, Volkelt, has already found
it impossible to confirm the representation of the body as a
house. Another objection is that here again dream activity
is attributed to the mind as a useless and aimless activity,
since according to the theory in question the mind is content
with forming phantasies about the stimulus with which it is
concerned, without even remotely contemplating anything
like a discharge of the stimulus.

But Scherner’s theory of the symbolisation of bodily stimuli
by the dream receives a heavy blow from another objection.
These bodily stimuli are present at all times, and according to
general assumption the mind is more accessible to them during
sleep than in waking. It is thus incomprehensible why the
mind does not dream continually throughout the night, and
why it does not dream every night and about all the organs.
If one attempts to avoid this objection by making the condition
that especial stimuli must proceed from the eye, the ear, the
teeth, the intestines in order to arouse dream activity, one is confronted by the difficulty of proving that this increase of
stimulation is objective, which is possible only in a small
number of cases. If the dream of flying is a symbolisation
of the upward and downward motion of the pulmonary lobes,
either this dream, as has already been remarked by Strümpell,
would be dreamt much oftener, or an accentuation of the
function of breathing during the dream would have to be
demonstrable. Still another case is possible—the most
probable of all—that now and then special motives directing
attention to the visceral sensations which are universally
present are active, but this case takes us beyond the range of
Scherner’s theory.

The value of Scherner’s and Volkelt’s discussions lies in
the fact that they call attention to a number of characteristics
of the dream content which are in need of explanation, and
which seem to promise new knowledge. It is quite true that
symbolisations of organs of the body and of their functions
are contained in dreams, that water in a dream often signifies
a desire to urinate, that the male genital may often be represented
by a staff standing erect or by a pillar, &c. In dreams
which show a very animated field of vision and brilliant
colours, in contrast to the dimness of other dreams, the interpretation
may hardly be dismissed that they are “dreams of
visual stimulation,” any more than it may be disputed that
there is a contribution of illusory formations in dreams which
contain noise and confusion of voices. A dream like that of
Scherner, of two rows of fair handsome boys standing opposite
to each other on a bridge, attacking each other and then
taking their places again, until finally the dreamer himself
sits down on the bridge and pulls a long tooth out of his jaw;
or a similar one of Volkelt’s, in which two rows of drawers play
a part, and which again ends in the extraction of a tooth;
dream formations of this sort, which are related in great
numbers by the authors, prevent our discarding Scherner’s
theory as an idle fabrication without seeking to find its kernel
of truth. We are now confronted by the task of giving the
supposed symbolisation of the dental stimulus an explanation
of a different kind.

Throughout our consideration of the theory of the somatic
sources of dreams, I have refrained from urging the argument which is inferred from our dream analyses. If we have succeeded
in proving, by a procedure which other authors have
not applied in their investigation of dreams, that the dream
as a psychic action possesses value peculiar to itself, that a
wish supplies the motive for its formation, and that the experiences
of the previous day furnish the immediate material for
its content, any other theory of dreams neglecting such an
important method of investigation, and accordingly causing
the dream to appear a useless and problematic psychic reaction
to somatic stimuli, is dismissible without any particular
comment. Otherwise there must be—which is highly improbable—two
entirely different kinds of dreams, of which
only one has come under our observation, while only the
other has been observed by the earlier connoisseurs of the
dream. It still remains to provide a place for the facts which
are used to support the prevailing theory of somatic dream-stimuli,
within our own theory of dreams.

We have already taken the first step in this direction in
setting up the thesis that the dream activity is under a compulsion
to elaborate all the dream stimuli which are simultaneously
present into a unified whole (p. 151). We have
seen that when two or more experiences capable of making
an impression have been left over from the previous day, the
wishes which result from them are united into one dream;
similarly, that an impression possessing psychic value and the
indifferent experiences of the previous day are united in the
dream material, provided there are available connecting ideas
between the two. Thus the dream appears to be a reaction to
everything which is simultaneously present as actual in the
sleeping mind. As far as we have hitherto analysed the
dream material, we have discovered it to be a collection of
psychic remnants and memory traces, which we were obliged
to credit (on account of the preference shown for recent and
infantile material) with a character of actuality, though the
nature of this was not at the time determinable. Now it will
not be difficult to foretell what will happen when new material
in the form of sensations is added to these actualities of
memory. These stimuli likewise derive importance for the
dream because they are actual; they are united with the
other psychic actualities in order to make up the material for dream formation. To express it differently, the stimuli
which appear during sleep are worked over into the fulfilment
of a wish, the other component parts of which are the remnants
of daily experience with which we are familiar. This union,
however, is not inevitable; we have heard that more than one
sort of attitude towards bodily stimuli is possible during sleep.
Wherever this union has been brought about, it has simply
been possible to find for the dream content that kind of presentation
material which will give representation to both
classes of dream sources, the somatic as well as the psychic.

The essential nature of the dream is not changed by this
addition of somatic material to the psychic sources of the
dream; it remains the fulfilment of a wish without reference
to the way in which its expression is determined by the actual
material.

I shall gladly find room here for a number of peculiarities,
which serve to put a different face on the significance of external
stimuli for the dream. I imagine that a co-operation of
individual, physiological, and accidental factors, conditioned
by momentary circumstances, determines how one will act in
each particular case of intensive objective stimulation during
sleep; the degree of the profoundness of sleep whether habitual
or accidental in connection with the intensity of the stimulus,
will in one case make it possible to suppress the stimulus, so
that it will not disturb sleep; in another case they will force
an awakening or will support the attempt to overcome the
stimulus by weaving it into the texture of the dream. In
correspondence with the multiplicity of these combinations,
external objective stimuli will receive expression more frequently
in the case of one person than in that of another. In the case
of myself, who am an excellent sleeper, and who stubbornly
resists any kind of disturbance in sleep, this intermixture of
external causes of irritation into my dreams is very rare, while
psychic motives apparently cause me to dream very easily.
I have indeed noted only a single dream in which an objective,
painful source of stimulation is demonstrable, and it will be
highly instructive to see what effect the external stimulus had
in this very dream.

I am riding on a grey horse, at first timidly and awkwardly,
as though I were only leaning against something. I meet a colleague P., who is mounted on a horse and is wearing a heavy
woollen suit; he calls my attention to something (probably to the
fact that my riding position is bad). Now I become more and
more expert on the horse, which is most intelligent; I sit comfortably,
and I notice that I am already quite at home in the
saddle. For a saddle I have a kind of padding, which completely
fills the space between the neck and the rump of the horse. In
this manner I ride with difficulty between two lumber-wagons.
After having ridden up the street for some distance, I turn around
and want to dismount, at first in front of a little open chapel,
which is situated close to the street. Then I actually dismount in
front of a chapel which stands near the first; the hotel is in the
same street, I could let the horse go there by itself, but I prefer to
lead it there. It seems as if I should be ashamed to arrive there
on horseback. In front of the hotel is standing a hall-boy who
shows me a card of mine which has been found, and who ridicules
me on account of it. On the card is written, doubly underlined,
“Eat nothing,” and then a second sentence (indistinct) something
like “Do not work”; at the same time a hazy idea that I am in a
strange city, in which I do no work.

It will not be apparent at once that this dream originated
under the influence, or rather under the compulsion, of a
stimulus of pain. The day before I had suffered from furuncles,
which made every movement a torture, and at last a furuncle
had grown to the size of an apple at the root of the scrotum,
and had caused me the most intolerable pains that accompanied
every step; a feverish lassitude, lack of appetite, and
the hard work to which I had nevertheless kept myself during
the day, had conspired with the pain to make me lose my
temper. I was not altogether in a condition to discharge my
duties as a physician, but in view of the nature and the location
of the malady, one might have expected some performance
other than riding, for which I was very especially unfitted.
It is this very activity, of riding into which I am plunged by
the dream; it is the most energetic denial of the suffering
which is capable of being conceived. In the first place, I do
not know how to ride, I do not usually dream of it, and I
never sat on a horse but once—without a saddle—and then I
did not feel comfortable. But in this dream I ride as though
I had no furuncle on the perineum, and why? just because I don’t want any . According to the description my saddle is
the poultice which has made it possible for me to go to sleep.
Probably I did not feel anything of my pain—as I was thus
taken care of—during the first few hours of sleeping. Then
the painful sensations announced themselves and tried to
wake me up, whereupon the dream came and said soothingly:
“Keep on sleeping, you won’t wake up anyway! You have
no furuncle at all, for you are riding on a horse, and with a
furuncle where you have it riding is impossible!” And the
dream was successful; the pain was stifled, and I went on
sleeping.

But the dream was not satisfied with “suggesting away”
the furuncle by means of tenaciously adhering to an idea
incompatible with that of the malady, in doing which it behaved
like the hallucinatory insanity of the mother who has lost her
child, or like the merchant who has been deprived of his
fortune by losses. [BP] In addition the details of the denied
sensation and of the image which is used to displace it are
employed by the dream as a means to connect the material
ordinarily actually present in the mind with the dream situation,
and to give this material representation. I am riding
on a grey horse—the colour of the horse corresponds exactly
to the pepper-and-salt costume in which I last met my colleague
P. in the country. I have been warned that highly seasoned
food is the cause of furunculosis, but in any case it is preferable
as an etiological explanation to sugar which ordinarily suggests
furunculosis. My friend P. has been pleased to “ride the high
horse” with regard to me, ever since he superseded me in the
treatment of a female patient, with whom I had performed
great feats (in the dream I first sit on the horse side-saddle
fashion, like a circus rider), but who really led me wherever
she wished, like the horse in the anecdote about the Sunday
equestrian. Thus the horse came to be a symbolic representation
of a lady patient (in the dream it is most intelligent).
“I feel quite at home up here,” refers to the position which I
occupied in the patient’s household until I was replaced by my
colleague P. “I thought you were securely seated in the saddle,” one of my few well-wishers among the great physicians
of this city recently said to me with reference to the same
household. And it was a feat to practise psychotherapy for
ten hours a day with such pains, but I know that I cannot
continue my particularly difficult work for any length of time
without complete physical health, and the dream is full of
gloomy allusions to the situation which must in that case
result (the card such as neurasthenics have and present to
doctors): No work and no food . With further interpretation
I see that the dream activity has succeeded in finding the
way from the wish-situation of riding to very early infantile
scenes of quarrelling, which must have taken place between
me and my nephew, who is now living in England, and who,
moreover, is a year older than I. Besides it has taken up
elements from my journeys to Italy; the street in the dream
is composed of impressions of Verona and Siena. Still more
exhaustive interpretation leads to sexual dream-thoughts,
and I recall what significance dream allusions to that beautiful
country had in the case of a female patient who had never been
in Italy (Itlay—German gen Italien — Genitalien —genitals).
At the same time there are references to the house in which I
was physician before my friend P., and to the place where the
furuncle is located.

Among the dreams mentioned in the previous chapter
there are several which might serve as examples for the elaboration
of so-called nerve stimuli. The dream about drinking in
full draughts is one of this sort; the somatic excitement in it
seems to be the only source of the dream, and the wish resulting
from the sensation—thirst—the only motive for dreaming.
Something similar is true of the other simple dreams, if the
somatic excitement alone is capable of forming a wish. The
dream of the sick woman who throws the cooling apparatus
from her cheek at night is an instance of a peculiar way of
reacting to painful excitements with a wish-fulfilment; it
seems as though the patient had temporarily succeeded in
making herself analgesic by ascribing her pains to a stranger.

My dream about the three Parcæ is obviously a dream of
hunger, but it has found means to refer the need for food back
to the longing of the child for its mother’s breast, and to make
the harmless desire a cloak for a more serious one, which is not permitted to express itself so openly. In the dream about
Count Thun we have seen how an accidental bodily desire is
brought into connection with the strongest, and likewise the
most strongly suppressed emotions of the psychic life. And
when the First Consul incorporates the sound of an exploding
bomb into a dream of battle before it causes him to wake, as
in the case reported by Garnier, the purpose for which psychic
activity generally concerns itself with sensations occurring
during sleep is revealed with extraordinary clearness. A young
lawyer, who has been deeply preoccupied with his first great
bankruptcy proceeding, and who goes to sleep during the
afternoon following, acts just like the great Napoleon. He
dreams about a certain G. Reich in Hussiatyn (German husten —to
cough), whom he knows in connection with the bankruptcy
proceeding, but Hussiatyn forces itself upon his attention still
further, with the result that he is obliged to awaken, and hears
his wife—who is suffering from bronchial catarrh—coughing
violently.

Let us compare the dream of Napoleon I., who, incidentally,
was an excellent sleeper, with that of the sleepy student, who
was awakened by his landlady with the admonition that he
must go to the hospital, who thereupon dreams himself into
a bed in the hospital, and then sleeps on, with the following
account of his motives: If I am already in the hospital, I
shan’t have to get up in order to go there. The latter is
obviously a dream of convenience; the sleeper frankly admits
to himself the motive for his dreaming; but he thereby
reveals one of the secrets of dreaming in general. In a certain
sense all dreams are dreams of convenience; they serve the
purpose of continuing sleep instead of awakening. The dream
is the guardian of sleep, not the disturber of it. We shall justify
this conception with respect to the psychic factors of awakening
elsewhere; it is possible, however, at this point to prove its
applicability to the influence exerted by objective external
excitements. Either the mind does not concern itself at all
with the causes of sensations, if it is able to do this in spite of
their intensity and of their significance, which is well understood
by it; or it employs the dream to deny these stimuli; or
thirdly, if it is forced to recognise the stimulus, it seeks to find
that interpretation of the stimulus which shall represent the actual sensation as a component part of a situation which is
desired and which is compatible with sleep. The actual sensation
is woven into the dream in order to deprive it of its
reality . Napoleon is permitted to go on sleeping; it is only a
dream recollection of the thunder of the cannon at Arcole
which is trying to disturb him. [BQ]

The wish to sleep, by which the conscious ego has been suspended
and which along with the dream-censor contributes its
share to the dream, must thus always be taken into account as a
motive for the formation of dreams, and every successful dream
is a fulfilment of this wish. The relation of this general, regularly
present, and invariable sleep-wish to the other wishes,
of which now the one, now the other is fulfilled, will be the
subject of a further explanation. In the wish to sleep we
have discovered a factor capable of supplying the deficiency
in the theory of Strümpell and Wundt, and of explaining the
perversity and capriciousness in the interpretation of the
outer stimulus. The correct interpretation, of which the
sleeping mind is quite capable, would imply an active interest
and would require that sleep be terminated; hence, of those
interpretations which are possible at all, only those are admitted
which are agreeable to the absolute censorship of the
somatic wish. It is something like this: It’s the nightingale
and not the lark. For if it’s the lark, love’s night is at an
end. From among the interpretations of the excitement
which are at the moment possible, that one is selected which
can secure the best connection with the wish-possibilities that
are lying in wait in the mind. Thus everything is definitely
determined, and nothing is left to caprice. The misinterpretation
is not an illusion, but—if you will—an excuse.
Here again, however, there is admitted an action which is a
modification of the normal psychic procedure, as in the case
where substitution by means of displacement is effected for
the purposes of the dream-censor.

If the outer nerve stimuli and inner bodily stimuli are
sufficiently intense to compel psychic attention, they represent—that
is, in case they result in dreaming and not in awakening—a
definite point in the formation of dreams, a nucleus in the dream material, for which an appropriate wish-fulfilment is
sought, in a way similar (see above) to the search for connecting
ideas between two dream stimuli. To this extent it is true
for a number of dreams that the somatic determines what their
content is to be. In this extreme case a wish which is not
exactly actual is aroused for the purpose of dream formation.
But the dream can do nothing but represent a wish in a situation
as fulfilled; it is, as it were, confronted by the task of
seeking what wish may be represented and fulfilled by means
of the situation which is now actual. Even if this actual
material is of a painful or disagreeable character, still it is not
useless for the purposes of dream formation. The psychic
life has control even over wishes the fulfilment of which brings
forth pleasure—a statement which seems contradictory, but
which becomes intelligible if one takes into account the presence
of two psychic instances and the censor existing between
them.

There are in the psychic life, as we have heard, repressed wishes which belong to the first system, and to whose fulfilment
the second system is opposed. There are wishes of this kind—and
we do not mean this in an historic sense, that there have
been such wishes and that these have then been destroyed—but
the theory of repression, which is essential to the study of
psychoneurosis, asserts that such repressed wishes still exist,
contemporaneously with an inhibition weighing them down.
Language has hit upon the truth when it speaks of the “suppression”
of such impulses. The psychic contrivance for
bringing such wishes to realisation remains preserved and in a
condition to be used. But if it happens that such a suppressed
wish is fulfilled, the vanquished inhibition of the second
system (which is capable of becoming conscious) is then expressed
as a painful feeling. To close this discussion; if
sensations of a disagreeable character which originate from
somatic sources are presented during sleep, this constellation
is taken advantage of by the dream activity to represent the
fulfilment—with more or less retention of the censor—of an
otherwise suppressed wish.

This condition of affairs makes possible a number of anxiety
dreams, while another series of the dream formations which
are unfavourable to the wish theory exhibits a different mechanism. For anxiety in dreams may be of a psychoneurotic
nature, or it may originate in psychosexual excitements,
in which case the anxiety corresponds to a repressed libido . Then this anxiety as well as the whole anxiety dream
has the significance of a neurotic symptom, and we are at the
dividing-line where the wish-fulfilling tendency of dreams
disappears. But in other anxiety-dreams the feeling of anxiety
comes from somatic sources (for instance in the case of persons
suffering from pulmonary or heart trouble, where there is
occasional difficulty in getting breath), and then it is used to
aid those energetically suppressed wishes in attaining fulfilment
in the form of a dream, the dreaming of which from
psychic motives would have resulted in the same release of
fear. It is not difficult to unite these two apparently discrepant
cases. Of two psychic formations, an emotional
inclination and an ideal content, which are intimately connected,
the one, which is presented as actual, supports the
other in the dream; now anxiety of somatic origin supports
the suppressed presentation content, now the ideal content,
which is freed from suppression, and which proceeds with the
impetus given by sexual emotion, assists the discharge of
anxiety. Of the one case it may be said that an emotion of
somatic origin is psychically interpreted; in the other case
everything is of psychic origin but the content which has been
suppressed is easily replaced by a somatic interpretation which
is suited to anxiety. The difficulties which lie in the way of
understanding all this have little to do with the dream; they
are due to the fact that in discussing these points we are
touching upon the problems of the development of anxiety
and of repression.

Undoubtedly the aggregate of bodily feelings is to be
included among the commanding dream stimuli which originate
internally. Not that it is able to furnish the dream content,
but it forces the dream thoughts to make a choice from the
material destined to serve the purpose of representation in the
dream content; it does this by putting within easy reach
that part of the material which is suited to its own character,
while withholding the other. Moreover this general feeling,
which is left over from the day, is probably connected with the
psychic remnants which are significant for the dream.

If somatic sources of excitement occurring during sleep—that
is, the sensations of sleep—are not of unusual intensity,
they play a part in the formation of dreams similar, in my
judgment, to that of the impressions of the day which have
remained recent but indifferent. I mean that they are drawn
into the dream formation, if they are qualified for being united
with the presentation content of the psychic dream-source,
but in no other case. They are treated as a cheap ever-ready
material, which is utilised as often as it is needed, instead of
prescribing, as a precious material does, the manner in which
it is to be utilised. The case is similar to that where a patron
of art brings to an artist a rare stone, a fragment of onyx, in
order that a work of art may be made of it. The size of the
stone, its colour, and its marking help to decide what bust or
what scene shall be represented in it, while in the case where
there is a uniform and abundant supply of marble or sandstone
the artist follows only the idea which takes shape in his mind.
Only in this manner, it seems to me, is the fact explicable
that the dream content resulting from bodily excitements
that have not been accentuated to a usual degree, does not
appear in all dreams and during every night.

Perhaps an example, which takes us back to the interpretation
of dreams, will best illustrate my meaning. One day I
was trying to understand the meaning of the sensations of
being impeded, of not being able to move from the spot, of
not being able to get finished, &c., which are dreamt about so
often, and which are so closely allied to anxiety. That night
I had the following dream: I am very incompletely dressed,
and I go from a dwelling on the ground floor up a flight of stairs
to an upper story. In doing this I jump over three steps at a
time, and I am glad to find I can mount the steps so quickly.
Suddenly I see that a servant girl is coming down the stairs,
that is, towards me. I am ashamed and try to hurry away, and
now there appears that sensation of being impeded; I am glued
to the steps and cannot move from the spot.

Analysis: The situation of the dream is taken from everyday
reality. In a house in Vienna I have two apartments,
which are connected only by a flight of stairs outside. My
consultation-rooms and my study are on an elevated portion
of the ground floor, and one story higher are my living-rooms. When I have finished my work downstairs late at night, I
go up the steps into my bedroom. On the evening before the
dream I had actually gone this short distance in a somewhat
disorderly attire—that is to say, I had taken off my collar,
cravat, and cuffs; but in the dream this has changed into a
somewhat more advanced degree of undress, which as usual
is indefinite. Jumping over the steps is my usual method of
mounting stairs; moreover it is the fulfilment of a wish that
has been recognised in the dream, for I have reassured myself
about the condition of my heart action by the ease of this
accomplishment. Moreover the manner in which I climb the
stairs is an effective contrast to the sensation of being impeded
which occurs in the second half of the dream. It shows me—something
which needed no proof—that the dream has no
difficulty in representing motor actions as carried out fully
and completely; think of flying in dreams!

But the stairs which I go up are not those of my house; at
first I do not recognise them; only the person coming toward
me reveals to me the location which they are intended to
signify. This woman is the maid of the old lady whom I
visit twice daily to give hypodermic injections; the stairs,
too, are quite similar to those which I must mount there twice
daily.

How do this flight of stairs and this woman get into my
dream? Being ashamed because one is not fully dressed, is
undoubtedly of a sexual character; the servant of whom I
dream is older than I, sulky, and not in the least attractive.
These questions call up exactly the following occurrences:
When I make my morning visit at this house I am usually
seized with a desire to clear my throat; the product of the
expectoration falls upon the steps. For there is no spittoon
on either of these floors, and I take the view that the stairs
should not be kept clean at my expense, but by the provision
of a spittoon. The housekeeper, likewise an elderly and sulky
person, with instincts for cleanliness, takes another view of
the matter. She lies in wait for me to see whether I take
the liberty referred to, and when she has made sure of it, I
hear her growl distinctly. For days thereafter she refuses to
show me her customary regard when we meet. On the day
before the dream the position of the housekeeper had been strengthened by the servant girl. I had just finished my usual
hurried visit to the patient when the servant confronted me in
the ante-room and observed: “You might as well have wiped
your shoes to-day, doctor, before you came into the room.
The red carpet is all dirty again from your feet.” This is the
whole claim which the flight of stairs and the servant-girl
can make for appearing in my dream.

An intimate connection exists between my flying over the
stairs and my spitting on the stairs. Pharyngitis and diseases
of the heart are both said to be punishments for the vice of
smoking, on account of which vice, of course, I do not enjoy a
reputation for great neatness with my housekeeper in the one
house any more than in the other, both of which the dream
fuses into a single image.

I must postpone the further interpretation of this dream
until I can give an account of the origin of the typical dream of
incomplete dress. I only note as a preliminary result from
the dream which has just been cited that the dream sensation
of inhibited action is always aroused at a point where a certain
connection requires it. A peculiar condition of my motility
during sleep cannot be the cause of this dream content, for a
moment before I saw myself hurrying over the steps with ease,
as though in confirmation of this fact.

( d ) Typical Dreams

In general we are not in a position to interpret the dream of
another person if he is unwilling to furnish us with the unconscious
thoughts which lie behind the dream content, and for
this reason the practical applicability of our method of dream
interpretation is seriously curtailed. [BR] But there are a certain
number of dreams—in contrast with the usual freedom displayed
by the individual in fashioning his dream world with
characteristic peculiarity, and thereby making it unintelligible—which
almost every one has dreamed in the same manner,
and of which we are accustomed to assume that they have
the same significance in the case of every dreamer. A peculiar interest belongs to these typical dreams for the reason that
they probably all come from the same sources with every
person, that they are thus particularly suited to give us
information upon the sources of dreams.

Typical dreams are worthy of the most exhaustive investigation.
I shall, however, only give a somewhat detailed consideration
to examples of this species, and for this purpose I
shall first select the so-called embarrassment dream of nakedness,
and the dream of the death of dear relatives.

The dream of being naked or scantily clad in the presence
of strangers occurs with the further addition that one is not
at all ashamed of it, &c. But the dream of nakedness is worthy
of our interest only when shame and embarrassment are felt
in it, when one wishes to flee or to hide, and when one feels the
strange inhibition that it is impossible to move from the spot
and that one is incapable of altering the disagreeable situation.
It is only in this connection that the dream is typical; the
nucleus of its content may otherwise be brought into all kinds
of relations or may be replaced by individual amplifications.
It is essentially a question of a disagreeable sensation of the
nature of shame, the wish to be able to hide one’s nakedness,
chiefly by means of locomotion, without being able to accomplish
this. I believe that the great majority of my readers
will at some time have found themselves in this situation in a
dream.

Usually the nature and manner of the experience is indistinct.
It is usually reported, “I was in my shirt,” but this
is rarely a clear image; in most cases the lack of clothing is so
indeterminate that it is designated in the report of the dream
by a set of alternatives: “I was in my chemise or in my
petticoat.” As a rule the deficiency in the toilet is not serious
enough to justify the feeling of shame attached to it. For a
person who has served in the army, nakedness is often replaced
by a mode of adjustment that is contrary to regulations. “I
am on the street without my sabre and I see officers coming,”
or “I am without my necktie,” or “I am wearing checkered
civilian’s trousers,” &c.

The persons before whom one is ashamed are almost always
strangers with faces that have been left undetermined. It
never occurs in the typical dream that one is reproved or even noticed on account of the dress which causes the embarrassment
to one’s self. Quite on the contrary, the people have an
air of indifference, or, as I had opportunity to observe in a
particularly clear dream, they look stiffly solemn. This is
worth thinking about.

The shamed embarrassment of the dreamer and the indifference
of the spectators form a contradiction which often
occurs in the dream. It would better accord with the feelings
of the dreamer if the strangers looked at him in astonishment
and laughed at him, or if they grew indignant. I think,
however, that the latter unpleasant feature has been obviated
by the tendency to wish-fulfilment, while the embarrassment,
being retained on some account or other, has been left standing,
and thus the two parts fail to agree. We have interesting
evidence to show that the dream, whose appearance has been
partially disfigured by the tendency to wish-fulfilment, has not
been properly understood. For it has become the basis of a
fairy tale familiar to us all in Andersen’s version, [BS] and it has
recently received poetic treatment by L. Fulda in the Talisman .
In Andersen’s fairy tale we are told of two impostors who
weave a costly garment for the Emperor, which, however, shall
be visible only to the good and true. The Emperor goes forth
clad in this invisible garment, and, the fabric serving as a sort
of touchstone, all the people are frightened into acting as
though they did not notice the nakedness of the Emperor.

But such is the situation in our dream. It does not require
great boldness to assume that the unintelligible dream content
has suggested the invention of a state of undress in which the
situation that is being remembered becomes significant. This
situation has then been deprived of its original meaning, and
placed at the service of other purposes. But we shall see
that such misunderstanding of the dream content often occurs
on account of the conscious activity of the second psychic
system, and is to be recognised as a factor in the ultimate
formation of the dream; furthermore, that in the development
of the obsessions and phobias similar misunderstandings,
likewise within the same psychic personality, play a leading
part. The source from which in our dream the material
for this transformation is taken can also be explained. The impostor is the dream, the Emperor is the dreamer himself, and
the moralising tendency betrays a hazy knowledge of the fact
that the latent dream content is occupied with forbidden
wishes which have become the victims of repression. The
connection in which such dreams appear during my analysis
of neurotics leaves no room for doubting that the dream is
based upon a recollection from earliest childhood. Only in
our childhood was there a time when we were seen by our
relatives as well as by strange nurses, servant girls, and visitors,
in scanty clothing, and at that time we were not ashamed of
our nakedness. [BT]

It may be observed in the case of children who are a little
older that being undressed has a kind of intoxicating effect
upon them, instead of making them ashamed. They laugh,
jump about, and strike their bodies; the mother, or whoever
is present, forbids them to do this, and says: “Fie, that is
shameful—you mustn’t do that.” Children often show exhibitional
cravings; it is hardly possible to go through a
village in our part of the country without meeting a two or
three-year-old tot who lifts up his or her shirt before the
traveller, perhaps in his honour. One of my patients has
reserved in his conscious memory a scene from the eighth year
of his life in which he had just undressed previous to going to
bed, and was about to dance into the room of his little sister
in his undershirt when the servant prevented his doing it.
In the childhood history of neurotics, denudation in the
presence of children of the opposite sex plays a great part; in
paranoia the desire to be observed while dressing and undressing
may be directly traced to these experiences; among
those remaining perverted there is a class which has accentuated
the childish impulse to a compulsion—they are the
exhibitionists.

This age of childhood in which the sense of shame is lacking
seems to our later recollections a Paradise, and Paradise itself
is nothing but a composite phantasy from the childhood of
the individual. It is for this reason, too, that in Paradise
human beings are naked and are not ashamed until the moment
arrives when the sense of shame and of fear are aroused; expulsion follows, and sexual life and cultural development
begin. Into this Paradise the dream can take us back every
night; we have already ventured the conjecture that the
impressions from earliest childhood (from the prehistoric
period until about the end of the fourth year) in themselves,
and independently of everything else, crave reproduction,
perhaps without further reference to their content, and that
the repetition of them is the fulfilment of a wish. Dreams of
nakedness, then, are exhibition dreams. [BU]

One’s own person, which is seen not as that of a child, but
as belonging to the present, and the idea of scanty clothing,
which became buried beneath so many later négligée recollections
or because of the censor, turns out to be obscure—these
two things constitute the nucleus of the exhibition dream.
Next come the persons before whom one is ashamed. I
know of no example where the actual spectators at those
infantile exhibitions reappear in the dream. For the dream
is hardly ever a simple recollection. Strangely enough, those
persons who are the objects of our sexual interest during childhood
are omitted from all the reproductions of the dream, of
hysteria, and of the compulsion neurosis; paranoia alone
puts the spectators back into their places, and is fanatically
convinced of their presence, although they remain invisible.
What the dream substitutes for these, the “many strange
people,” who take no notice of the spectacle which is presented,
is exactly the wish-opposite of that single, intimate person for
whom the exposure was intended. “Many strange people,”
moreover, are often found in the dream in any other favourable
connection; as a wish-opposite they always signify “a secret.” [BV] It may be seen how the restoration of the old condition of
affairs, as it occurs in paranoia, is subject to this antithesis.
One is no longer alone. One is certainly being watched, but
the spectators are “many strange, curiously indeterminate
people.”

Furthermore, repression has a place in the exhibition dream. For the disagreeable sensation of the dream is
the reaction of the second psychic instance to the fact
that the exhibition scene which has been rejected by it
has in spite of this succeeded in securing representation.
The only way to avoid this sensation would be not to revive
the scene.

Later on we shall again deal with the sensation of being
inhibited. It serves the dream excellently in representing
the conflict of the will, the negation. According to our unconscious
purpose exhibition is to be continued; according to
the demands of the censor, it is to be stopped.

The relation of our typical dreams to fairy tales and to
other poetic material is neither a sporadic nor an accidental
one. Occasionally the keen insight of a poet has analytically
recognised the transforming process—of which the poet is
usually the tool—and has followed it backwards, that is to
say, traced it to the dream. A friend has called my attention
to the following passage in G. Keller’s Der Grüne Heinrich :
“I do not wish, dear Lee, that you should ever come to realise
from experience the peculiar piquant truth contained in the
situation of Odysseus, when he appears before Nausikaa and
her playmates, naked and covered with mud! Would you
like to know what it means? Let us consider the incident
closely. If you are ever separated from your home, and from
everything that is dear to you, and wander about in a strange
country, when you have seen and experienced much, when you
have cares and sorrows, and are, perhaps, even miserable and
forlorn, you will some night inevitably dream that you are
approaching your home; you will see it shining and beaming
in the most beautiful colours; charming, delicate and lovely
figures will come to meet you; and you will suddenly discover
that you are going about in rags, naked and covered with dust.
A nameless feeling of shame and fear seizes you, you try to
cover yourself and to hide, and you awaken bathed in sweat.
As long as men exist, this will be the dream of the care-laden,
fortune-battered man, and thus Homer has taken his situation
from the profoundest depths of the eternal character of
humanity.”

This profound and eternal character of humanity, upon
the touching of which in his listeners the poet usually calculates, is made up of the stirrings of the spirit which are rooted in
childhood, in the period which later becomes prehistoric.
Suppressed and forbidden wishes of childhood break forth
under cover of those wishes of the homeless man which are
unobjectionable and capable of becoming conscious, and for
that reason the dream which is made objective in the legend
of Nausikaa regularly assumes the form of a dream of
anxiety.

My own dream, mentioned on p. 201, of hurrying up the
stairs, which is soon afterward changed into that of being glued
to the steps, is likewise an exhibition dream, because it shows
the essential components of such a dream. It must thus
permit of being referred to childish experiences, and the
possession of these ought to tell us how far the behaviour of
the servant girl towards me—her reproach that I had soiled
the carpet—helped her to secure the position which she occupies
in the dream. I am now able to furnish the desired explanation.
One learns in psychoanalysis to interpret temporal
proximity by objective connection; two thoughts, apparently
without connection, which immediately follow one another,
belong to a unity which can be inferred; just as an a and a t ,
which I write down together, should be pronounced as one
syllable, at . The same is true of the relation of dreams to one
another. The dream just cited, of the stairs, has been taken
from a series of dreams, whose other members I am familiar
with on account of having interpreted them. The dream which
is included in this series must belong to the same connection.
Now the other dreams of the series are based upon the recollection
of a nurse to whom I was entrusted from some time in
the period when I was suckling to the age of two and a half
years, and of whom a hazy recollection has remained in my
consciousness. According to information which I have recently
obtained from my mother, she was old and ugly, but
very intelligent and thorough; according to inferences which
I may draw from my dreams, she did not always give me the
kindest treatment, and said hard words to me when I showed
insufficient aptitude for education in cleanliness. Thus by
attempting to continue this educational work the servant
girl develops a claim to be treated by me, in the dream, as an
incarnation of the prehistoric old woman. It is to be assumed that the child bestowed his love upon this governess in spite
of her bad treatment of him. [BW]

Another series of dreams which might be called typical are
those which have the content that a dear relative, parent,
brother, or sister, child or the like, has died. Two classes of
these dreams must immediately be distinguished—those in
which the dreamer remains unaffected by sorrow while dreaming,
and those in which he feels profound grief on account of
the death, in which he even expresses this grief during sleep
by fervid tears.

We may ignore the dreams of the first group; they have
no claim to be reckoned as typical. If they are analysed, it is
found that they signify something else than what they contain,
that they are intended to cover up some other wish. Thus it
is with the dream of the aunt who sees the only son of her
sister lying on a bier before her (p 129). This does not signify
that she wishes the death of her little nephew; it only conceals,
as we have learned, a wish to see a beloved person once
more after long separation—the same person whom she had
seen again after a similar long intermission at the funeral of
another nephew. This wish, which is the real content of
the dream, gives no cause for sorrow, and for that reason no
sorrow is felt in the dream. It may be seen in this case that
the emotion which is contained in the dream does not belong
to the manifest content of the dream, but to the latent one,
and that the emotional content has remained free from the
disfigurement which has befallen the presentation content.

It is a different story with the dreams in which the death
of a beloved relative is imagined and where sorrowful emotion
is felt. These signify, as their content says, the wish that the
person in question may die, and as I may here expect that the
feelings of all readers and of all persons who have dreamt
anything similar will object to my interpretation, I must
strive to present my proof on the broadest possible basis.

We have already had one example to show that the wishes represented in the dream as fulfilled are not always actual
wishes. They may also be dead, discarded, covered, and repressed
wishes, which we must nevertheless credit with a sort
of continuous existence on account of their reappearance in
the dream. They are not dead like persons who have died in
our sense, but they resemble the shades in the Odyssey which
awaken a certain kind of life as soon as they have drunk blood.
In the dream of the dead child in the box (p. 130) we were
concerned with a wish that had been actual fifteen years
before, and which had been frankly admitted from that time.
It is, perhaps, not unimportant from the point of view of dream
theory if I add that a recollection from earliest childhood is at
the basis even of this dream. While the dreamer was a little
child—it cannot be definitely determined at what time—she
had heard that during pregnancy of which she was the fruit
her mother had fallen into a profound depression of spirits
and had passionately wished for the death of her child before
birth. Having grown up herself and become pregnant, she
now follows the example of her mother.

If some one dreams with expressions of grief that his
father or mother, his brother or sister, has died, I shall not
use the dream as a proof that he wishes them dead now .
The theory of the dreams does not require so much; it is
satisfied with concluding that the dreamer has wished them
dead—at some one time in childhood. I fear, however, that
this limitation will not contribute much to quiet the objectors;
they might just as energetically contest the possibility that
they have ever had such thoughts as they are sure that they
do not cherish such wishes at present. I must, therefore,
reconstruct a part of the submerged infantile psychology on
the basis of the testimony which the present still furnishes. [BX]

Let us at first consider the relation of children to their
brothers and sisters. I do not know why we presuppose that
it must be a loving one, since examples of brotherly and sisterly
enmity among adults force themselves upon every one’s experience,
and since we so often know that this estrangement
originated even during childhood or has always existed. But many grown-up people, who to-day are tenderly attached to
their brothers and sisters and stand by them, have lived with
them during childhood in almost uninterrupted hostility.
The older child has ill-treated the younger, slandered it, and
deprived it of its toys; the younger has been consumed by
helpless fury against the elder, has envied it and feared it,
or its first impulse toward liberty and first feelings of injustice
have been directed against the oppressor. The parents say
that the children do not agree, and cannot find the reason for
it. It is not difficult to see that the character even of a well-behaved
child is not what we wish to find in a grown-up person.
The child is absolutely egotistical; it feels its wants acutely
and strives remorselessly to satisfy them, especially with its
competitors, other children, and in the first instance with its
brothers and sisters. For doing this we do not call the child
wicked—we call it naughty; it is not responsible for its evil
deeds either in our judgment or in the eyes of the penal law.
And this is justifiably so; for we may expect that within
this very period of life which we call childhood, altruistic
impulses and morality will come to life in the little egotist,
and that, in the words of Meynert, a secondary ego will overlay
and restrain the primary one. It is true that morality does
not develop simultaneously in all departments, and furthermore,
the duration of the unmoral period of childhood is of
different length in different individuals. In cases where the
development of this morality fails to appear, we are pleased
to talk about “degeneration”; they are obviously cases of
arrested development. Where the primary character has
already been covered up by later development, it may be at
least partially uncovered again by an attack of hysteria. The
correspondence between the so-called hysterical character
and that of a naughty child is strikingly evident. A compulsion
neurosis, on the other hand, corresponds to a super-morality,
imposed upon the primary character that is again
asserting itself, as an increased check.

Many persons, then, who love their brothers and sisters,
and who would feel bereaved by their decease, have evil wishes
towards them from earlier times in their unconscious wishes,
which are capable of being realised in the dream. It is
particularly interesting to observe little children up to three years old in their attitude towards their brothers and sisters.
So far the child has been the only one; he is now informed that
the stork has brought a new child. The younger surveys the
arrival, and then expresses his opinion decidedly: “The stork
had better take it back again.” [BY]

I subscribe in all seriousness to the opinion that the child
knows enough to calculate the disadvantage it has to expect
on account of the new-comer. I know in the case of a lady of
my acquaintance who agrees very well with a sister four years
younger than herself, that she responded to the news of her
younger sister’s arrival with the following words: “But I
shan’t give her my red cap, anyway.” If the child comes to
this realisation only at a later time, its enmity will be aroused
at that point. I know of a case where a girl, not yet three
years old, tried to strangle a suckling in the cradle, because
its continued presence, she suspected, boded her no good.
Children are capable of envy at this time of life in all its intensity
and distinctness. Again, perhaps, the little brother or
sister has really soon disappeared; the child has again drawn
the entire affection of the household to itself, and then a new
child is sent by the stork; is it then unnatural for the favourite
to wish that the new competitor may have the same fate as
the earlier one, in order that he may be treated as well as he
was before during the interval? Of course this attitude of
the child towards the younger infant is under normal circumstances
a simple function of the difference of age. After a
certain time the maternal instincts of the girl will be excited
towards the helpless new-born child.

Feelings of enmity towards brothers and sisters must occur
far more frequently during the age of childhood than is noted
by the dull observation of adults.

In case of my own children, who followed one another
rapidly, I missed the opportunity to make such observations;
I am now retrieving it through my little nephew, whose complete
domination was disturbed after fifteen months by the arrival of a female competitor. I hear, it is true, that the
young man acts very chivalrously towards his little sister, that
he kisses her hand and pets her; but in spite of this I have
convinced myself that even before the completion of his
second year he is using his new facility in language to criticise
this person who seems superfluous to him. Whenever the
conversation turns upon her, he chimes in and cries angrily:
“Too (l)ittle, too (l)ittle.” During the last few months, since
the child has outgrown this unfavourable criticism, owing to
its splendid development, he has found another way of justifying
his insistence that she does not deserve so much attention.
On all suitable occasions he reminds us, “She hasn’t any
teeth.” [BZ] We have all preserved the recollection of the eldest
daughter of another sister of mine—how the child which was
at that time six years old sought assurance from one aunt
after another for an hour and a half with the question: “Lucy
can’t understand that yet, can she?” Lucy was the competitor,
two and a half years younger.

I have never failed in any of my female patients to find
this dream of the death of brothers and sisters denoting
exaggerated hostility. I have met with only one exception,
which could easily be reinterpreted into a confirmation of the
rule. Once in the course of a sitting while I was explaining
this condition of affairs to a lady, as it seemed to have a bearing
upon the symptoms under consideration, she answered, to
my astonishment, that she had never had such dreams. However,
she thought of another dream which supposedly had
nothing to do with the matter—a dream which she had first
dreamed at the age of four, when she was the youngest child,
and had since dreamed repeatedly. “A great number of
children, all of them the dreamer’s brothers and sisters, and
male and female cousins, were romping about in a meadow.
Suddenly they all got wings, flew up, and were gone.” She
had no idea of the significance of the dream; but it will not
be difficult for us to recognise it as a dream of the death of all
the brothers and sisters, in its original form, and little influenced
by the censor. I venture to insert the following
interpretation: At the death of one out of a large number of children—in this case the children of two brothers were brought
up in common as brothers and sisters—is it not probable that
our dreamer, at that time not yet four years old, asked a wise,
grown-up person: “What becomes of children when they
are dead?” The answer probably was: “They get wings
and become angels.” According to this explanation all the
brothers and sisters and cousins in the dream now have wings
like angels and—this is the important thing—they fly away.
Our little angel-maker remains alone, think of it, the only
one after such a multitude! The feature that the children
are romping about on a meadow points with little ambiguity
to butterflies, as though the child had been led by the same
association which induced the ancients to conceive Psyche
as having the wings of a butterfly.

Perhaps some one will now object that, although the inimical
impulses of children towards their brothers and sisters may
well enough be admitted, how does the childish disposition
arrive at such a height of wickedness as to wish death to a
competitor or stronger playmate, as though all transgressions
could be atoned for only by the death-punishment? Whoever
talks in this manner forgets that the childish idea of “being
dead” has little else but the words in common with our own.
The child knows nothing of the horrors of decay, of shivering
in the cold grave, of the terror of the infinite Nothing, which
the grown-up person, as all the myths concerning the Great
Beyond testify, finds it so hard to bear in his conception. Fear
of death is strange to the child; therefore it plays with the
horrible word and threatens another child: “If you do that
again you will die, as Francis died,” whereat the poor mother
shudders, for perhaps she cannot forget that the great majority
of mortals do not succeed in living beyond the years of childhood.
It is still possible, even for a child eight years old, on
returning from a museum of natural history, to say to its
mother: “Mamma, I love you so; if you ever die, I am going
to have you stuffed and set you up here in the room so I can
always, always see you!” So little does the childish conception
of being dead resemble our own. [CA]

Being dead means for the child, which has been spared
the scenes of suffering previous to dying, the same as “being
gone,” not disturbing the survivors any more. The child
does not distinguish the manner and means by which this
absence is brought about, whether by travelling, estrangement,
or death. If, during the prehistoric years of a child, a nurse
has been sent away and its mother has died a short while
after, the two experiences, as is revealed by analysis, overlap
in his memory. The fact that the child does not miss very
intensely those who are absent has been realised by many a
mother to her sorrow, after she has returned home after a
summer journey of several weeks, and has been told upon
inquiry: “The children have not asked for their mother a
single time.” But if she really goes to that “undiscovered
country from whose bourn no traveller returns,” the children
seem at first to have forgotten her, and begin only subsequently to remember the dead mother.

If, then, the child has motives for wishing the absence of
another child, every restraint is lacking which would prevent
it from clothing this wish in the form that the child may die,
and the psychic reaction to the dream of wishing death proves
that, in spite of all the differences in content, the wish in the
case of the child is somehow or other the same as it is with
adults.

If now the death-wish of the child towards its brothers and
sisters has been explained by the childish egotism, which causes
the child to regard its brothers and sisters as competitors,
how may we account for the same wish towards parents, who
bestow love on the child and satisfy its wants, and whose preservation
it ought to desire from these very egotistical motives?

In the solution of this difficulty we are aided by the experience
that dreams of the death of parents predominantly refer
to that member of the parental couple which shares the sex
of the dreamer, so that the man mostly dreams of the death of
his father, the woman of the death of her mother. I cannot
claim that this happens regularly, but the predominating
occurrence of this dream in the manner indicated is so evident
that it must be explained through some factor that is universally
operative. To express the matter boldly, it is as
though a sexual preference becomes active at an early period, as though the boy regards his father as a rival in love, and as
though the girl takes the same attitude toward her mother—a
rival by getting rid of whom he or she cannot but profit.

Before rejecting this idea as monstrous, let the reader
consider the actual relations between parents and children.
What the requirements of culture and piety demand of this
relation must be distinguished from what daily observation
shows us to be the fact. More than one cause for hostile
feeling is concealed within the relations between parents and
children; the conditions necessary for the actuation of wishes
which cannot exist in the presence of the censor are most
abundantly provided. Let us dwell at first upon the relation
between father and son. I believe that the sanctity which we
have ascribed to the injunction of the decalogue dulls our
perception of reality. Perhaps we hardly dare to notice that
the greater part of humanity neglects to obey the fifth
commandment. In the lowest as well as in the highest strata of
human society, piety towards parents is in the habit of receding
before other interests. The obscure reports which have come
to us in mythology and legend from the primeval ages of human
society give us an unpleasant idea of the power of the father
and the ruthlessness with which it was used. Kronos devours
his children, as the wild boar devours the brood of the sow;
Zeus emasculates his father [CB] and takes his place as a ruler.
The more despotically the father ruled in the ancient family,
the more must the son have taken the position of an enemy,
and the greater must have been his impatience, as designated
successor, to obtain the mastery himself after his father’s
death. Even in our own middle-class family the father is
accustomed to aid the development of the germ of hatred which
naturally belongs to the paternal relation by refusing the son
the disposal of his own destiny, or the means necessary for
this. A physician often has occasion to notice that the son’s
grief at the loss of his father cannot suppress his satisfaction
at the liberty which he has at last obtained. Every father
frantically holds on to whatever of the sadly antiquated potestas patris still remains in the society of to-day, and every poet
who, like Ibsen, puts the ancient strife between father and son
in the foreground of his fiction is sure of his effect. The causes
of conflict between mother and daughter arise when the daughter
grows up and finds a guardian in her mother, while she desires
sexual freedom, and when, on the other hand, the mother has
been warned by the budding beauty of her daughter that the
time has come for her to renounce sexual claims.

All these conditions are notorious and open to everyone’s
inspection. But they do not serve to explain dreams of the
death of parents found in the case of persons to whom piety
towards their parents has long since come to be inviolable.
We are furthermore prepared by the preceding discussion to
find that the death-wish towards parents is to be explained by
reference to earliest childhood.

This conjecture is reaffirmed with a certainty that makes
doubt impossible in its application to psychoneurotics through
the analyses that have been undertaken with them. It is
here found that the sexual wishes of the child—in so far as
they deserve this designation in their embryonic state—awaken
at a very early period, and that the first inclinations of
the girl are directed towards the father, and the first childish
cravings of the boy towards the mother. The father thus
becomes an annoying competitor for the boy, as the mother
does for the girl, and we have already shown in the case of
brothers and sisters how little it takes for this feeling to lead
the child to the death-wish. Sexual selection, as a rule, early
becomes evident in the parents; it is a natural tendency for
the father to indulge the little daughter, and for the mother
to take the part of the sons, while both work earnestly for the
education of the little ones when the magic of sex does not
prejudice their judgment. The child is very well aware of
any partiality, and resists that member of the parental couple
who discourages it. To find love in a grown-up person is for
the child not only the satisfaction of a particular craving, but
also means that the child’s will is to be yielded to in other
respects. Thus the child obeys its own sexual impulse, and
at the same time re-enforces the feeling which proceeds from
the parents, if it makes a selection among the parents that
corresponds to theirs.

Most of the signs of these infantile inclinations are usually
overlooked; some of them may be observed even after the
first years of childhood. An eight-year-old girl of my acquaintance,
when her mother is called from the table, takes
advantage of the opportunity to proclaim herself her successor.
“Now I shall be Mamma; Charles, do you want some
more vegetables? Have some, I beg you,” &c. A particularly
gifted and vivacious girl, not yet four years old, with
whom this bit of child psychology is unusually transparent,
says outright: “Now mother can go away; then father must
marry me and I shall be his wife.” Nor does this wish by any
means exclude from child life the possibility that the child
may love his mother affectionately. If the little boy is allowed
to sleep at his mother’s side whenever his father goes on a
journey, and if after his father’s return he must go back to the
nursery to a person whom he likes far less, the wish may be
easily actuated that his father may always be absent, in order
that he may keep his place next to his dear, beautiful mamma;
and the father’s death is obviously a means for the attainment
of this wish; for the child’s experience has taught him that
“dead” folks, like grandpa, for example, are always absent;
they never return.

Although observations upon little children lend themselves,
without being forced, to the proposed interpretation,
they do not carry the full conviction which psychoanalyses
of adult neurotics obtrude upon the physician. The dreams
in question are here cited with introductions of such a nature
that their interpretation as wish-dreams becomes unavoidable.
One day I find a lady sad and weeping. She says: “I do not
want to see my relatives any more; they must shudder at
me.” Thereupon, almost without any transition, she tells
that she remembers a dream, whose significance, of course,
she does not know. She dreamed it four years before, and it
is as follows: A fox or a lynx is taking a walk on the roof; then
something falls down, or she falls down, and after that her mother is
carried out of the house dead —whereat the dreamer cries bitterly.
No sooner had I informed her that this dream must signify a
wish from her childhood to see her mother dead, and that it is
because of this dream that she thinks that her relatives must
shudder at her, than she furnished some material for explaining the dream. “Lynx-eye” is an opprobrious epithet which a
street boy once bestowed on her when she was a very small
child; when she was three years old a brick had fallen on her
mother’s head so that she bled severely.

I once had opportunity to make a thorough study of a
young girl who underwent several psychic states. In the state
of frenzied excitement with which the illness started, the
patient showed a very strong aversion to her mother; she
struck and scolded her as soon as she approached the bed,
while at the same time she remained loving and obedient to a
much older sister. Then there followed a clear but somewhat
apathetic state with very much disturbed sleep. It was in
this phase that I began to treat her and to analyse her dreams.
An enormous number of these dealt in a more or less abstruse
manner with the death of the mother; now she was present
at the funeral of an old woman, now she saw her sisters sitting
at the table dressed in mourning; the meaning of the dreams
could not be doubted. During the further progress of the
convalescence hysterical phobias appeared; the most torturing
of these was the idea that something happened to her
mother. She was always having to hurry home from wherever
she happened to be in order to convince herself that her mother
was still alive. Now this case, in view of my other experiences,
was very instructive; it showed in polyglot translations, as it
were, the different ways in which the psychic apparatus reacts
to the same exciting idea. In the state of excitement which
I conceive as the overpowering of the second psychic instance,
the unconscious enmity towards the mother became potent
as a motor impulse; then, after calmness set in, following the
suppression of the tumult, and after the domination of the
censor had been restored, this feeling of enmity had access
only to the province of dreams in order to realise the wish that
the mother might die; and after the normal condition had
been still further strengthened, it created the excessive concern
for the mother as a hysterical counter-reaction and manifestation
of defence. In the light of these considerations it is no
longer inexplicable why hysterical girls are so often extravagantly
attached to their mothers.

On another occasion I had opportunity to get a profound
insight into the unconscious psychic life of a young man for whom a compulsion-neurosis made life almost unendurable,
so that he could not go on the street, because he was harassed
by the obsession that he would kill every one he met. He spent
his days in arranging evidence for an alibi in case he should be
charged with any murder that might have occurred in the
city. It is superfluous to remark that this man was as moral
as he was highly cultured. The analysis—which, moreover,
led to a cure—discovered murderous impulses toward the
young man’s somewhat over-strict father as the basis of these
disagreeable ideas of compulsion—impulses which, to his great
surprise, had received conscious expression when he was seven
years old, but which, of course, had originated in much earlier
years of childhood. After the painful illness and death of
the father, the obsessive reproach transferred to strangers in
the form of the afore-mentioned phobia, appeared when the
young man was thirty-one years old. Anyone capable of
wishing to push his own father from a mountain-top into an
abyss is certainly not to be trusted to spare the lives of those
who are not so closely bound to him; he does well to lock
himself into his room.

According to my experience, which is now large, parents
play a leading part in the infantile psychology of all later
neurotics, and falling in love with one member of the parental
couple and hatred of the other help to make up that fateful
sum of material furnished by the psychic impulses, which has
been formed during the infantile period, and which is of such
great importance for the symptoms appearing in the later
neurosis. But I do not think that psychoneurotics are here
sharply distinguished from normal human beings, in that
they are capable of creating something absolutely new and
peculiar to themselves. It is far more probable, as is shown
also by occasional observation upon normal children, that in
their loving or hostile wishes towards their parents psychoneurotics
only show in exaggerated form feelings which are
present less distinctly and less intensely in the minds of most
children. Antiquity has furnished us with legendary material
to confirm this fact, and the deep and universal effectiveness of
these legends can only be explained by granting a similar
universal applicability to the above-mentioned assumption in
infantile psychology.

I refer to the legend of King Oedipus and the drama of the
same name by Sophocles. Oedipus, the son of Laius, king of
Thebes, and of Jocasta, is exposed while a suckling, because
an oracle has informed the father that his son, who is still
unborn, will be his murderer. He is rescued, and grows up as
the king’s son at a foreign court, until, being uncertain about
his origin, he also consults the oracle, and is advised to avoid
his native place, for he is destined to become the murderer of
his father and the husband of his mother. On the road leading
away from his supposed home he meets King Laius and strikes
him dead in a sudden quarrel. Then he comes to the gates
of Thebes, where he solves the riddle of the Sphynx who is
barring the way, and he is elected king by the Thebans in
gratitude, and is presented with the hand of Jocasta. He
reigns in peace and honour for a long time, and begets two sons
and two daughters upon his unknown mother, until at last a
plague breaks out which causes the Thebans to consult the
oracle anew. Here Sophocles’ tragedy begins. The messengers
bring the advice that the plague will stop as soon as the
murderer of Laius is driven from the country. But where is
he hidden?

“Where are they to be found? How shall we trace the
perpetrators of so old a crime where no conjecture leads to
discovery?” [CC]

The action of the play now consists merely in a revelation,
which is gradually completed and artfully delayed—resembling
the work of a psychoanalysis—of the fact that Oedipus
himself is the murderer of Laius, and the son of the dead man
and of Jocasta. Oedipus, profoundly shocked at the monstrosities
which he has unknowingly committed, blinds himself
and leaves his native place. The oracle has been fulfilled.

The Oedipus Tyrannus is a so-called tragedy of fate; its
tragic effect is said to be found in the opposition between the
powerful will of the gods and the vain resistance of the human
beings who are threatened with destruction; resignation to
the will of God and confession of one’s own helplessness is the
lesson which the deeply-moved spectator is to learn from the
tragedy. Consequently modern authors have tried to obtain
a similar tragic effect by embodying the same opposition in a story of their own invention. But spectators have sat unmoved
while a curse or an oracular sentence has been fulfilled on
blameless human beings in spite of all their struggles; later
tragedies of fate have all remained without effect.

If the Oedipus Tyrannus is capable of moving modern men
no less than it moved the contemporary Greeks, the explanation
of this fact cannot lie merely in the assumption that the
effect of the Greek tragedy is based upon the opposition between
fate and human will, but is to be sought in the peculiar
nature of the material by which the opposition is shown.
There must be a voice within us which is prepared to recognise
the compelling power of fate in Oedipus , while we justly condemn
the situations occurring in Die Ahnfrau or in other
tragedies of later date as arbitrary inventions. And there must
be a factor corresponding to this inner voice in the story of
King Oedipus. His fate moves us only for the reason that it
might have been ours, for the oracle has put the same curse
upon us before our birth as upon him. Perhaps we are all
destined to direct our first sexual impulses towards our
mothers, and our first hatred and violent washes towards our
fathers; our dreams convince us of it. King Oedipus, who
has struck his father Laius dead and has married his mother
Jocasta, is nothing but the realised wish of our childhood.
But more fortunate than he, we have since succeeded, unless
we have become psychoneurotics, in withdrawing our sexual
impulses from our mothers and in forgetting our jealousy of
our fathers. We recoil from the person for whom this primitive
wish has been fulfilled with all the force of the repression which
these wishes have suffered within us. By his analysis, showing
us the guilt of Oedipus, the poet urges us to recognise our own
inner self, in which these impulses, even if suppressed, are still
present. The comparison with which the chorus leaves us—

“... Behold! this Oedipus, who unravelled the famous
riddle and who was a man of eminent virtue; a man who
trusted neither to popularity nor to the fortune of his citizens;
see how great a storm of adversity hath at last overtaken
him” (Act v. sc. 4).

This warning applies to ourselves and to our pride, to us, who
have grown so wise and so powerful in our own estimation since the years of our childhood. Like Oedipus, we live in
ignorance of the wishes that offend morality, wishes which
nature has forced upon us, and after the revelation of which we
want to avert every glance from the scenes of our childhood.

In the very text of Sophocles’ tragedy there is an unmistakable
reference to the fact that the Oedipus legend originates
in an extremely old dream material, which consists of the
painful disturbance of the relation towards one’s parents by
means of the first impulses of sexuality. Jocasta comforts
Oedipus—who is not yet enlightened, but who has become
worried on account of the oracle—by mentioning to him
the dream which is dreamt by so many people, though she
attaches no significance to it—

“For it hath already been the lot of many men in dreams
to think themselves partners of their mother’s bed. But he
passes most easily through life to whom these circumstances
are trifles” (Act iv. sc. 3).

The dream of having sexual intercourse with one’s mother
occurred at that time, as it does to-day, to many people, who
tell it with indignation and astonishment. As may be understood,
it is the key to the tragedy and the complement to the
dream of the death of the father. The story of Oedipus is
the reaction of the imagination to these two typical dreams,
and just as the dream when occurring to an adult is experienced
with feelings of resistance, so the legend must contain terror
and self-chastisement. The appearance which it further
assumes is the result of an uncomprehending secondary elaboration
which tries to make it serve theological purposes
( cf. the dream material of exhibitionism, p. 206). The attempt
to reconcile divine omnipotence with human responsibility
must, of course, fail with this material as with every
other. [CD]

I must not leave the typical dream of the death of dear
relatives without somewhat further elucidating the subject of their significance for the theory of the dream in general.
These dreams show us a realisation of the very unusual case
where the dream thought, which has been created by the
repressed wish, completely escapes the censor, and is transferred
to the dream without alteration. There must be present
peculiar conditions making possible such an outcome. I find
circumstances favourable to these dreams in the two following
factors: First, there is no wish which we believe further from
us; we believe such a wish “would never occur to us in a
dream”; the dream censor is therefore not prepared for this
monstrosity, just as the legislation of Solon was incapable of
establishing a punishment for patricide. Secondly, the repressed
and unsuspected wish is in just this case particularly
often met by a fragment of the day’s experience in the shape
of a concern about the life of the beloved person. This concern
cannot be registered in the dream by any other means
than by taking advantage of the wish that has the same
content; but it is possible for the wish to mask itself behind
the concern which has been awakened during the day. If one
is inclined to think all this a more simple process, and that
one merely continues during the night and in dreams what
one has been concerned with during the day, the dream of the
death of beloved persons is removed from all connection with
dream explanation, and an easily reducible problem is uselessly
retained.

It is also instructive to trace the relation of these dreams to
anxiety dreams. In the dream of the death of dear persons
the repressed wish has found a way of avoiding the censor,
and the distortion which it causes. In this case the inevitable
concomitant manifestation is that disagreeable sensations are
felt in the dream. Thus the dream of fear is brought about
only when the censor is entirely or partially overpowered,
and, on the other hand, the overpowering of the censor is made
easier when fear has already been furnished by somatic sources.
Thus it becomes obvious for what purpose the censor performs
its office and practises dream distortion; it does this in order
to prevent the development of fear or other forms of disagreeable
emotion .

I have spoken above of the egotism of the infantile mind,
and I may now resume this subject in order to suggest that dreams preserve this characteristic—thus showing their connection
with infantile life. Every dream is absolutely egotistical;
in every dream the beloved ego appears, even though it
may be in a disguised form. The wishes that are realised in
dreams are regularly the wishes of this ego; it is only a deceptive
appearance if interest in another person is thought to
have caused the dream. I shall subject to analysis several
examples which appear to contradict this assertion.

I. A boy not yet four years old relates the following: He
saw a large dish garnished, and upon it a large piece of roast meat,
and the meat was all of a sudden—not cut to pieces—but eaten up.
He did not see the person who ate it. [CE]

Who may this strange person be of whose luxurious repast
this little fellow dreams? The experiences of the day must
give us the explanation of this. For a few days the boy had
been living on a diet of milk according to the doctor’s prescription;
but on the evening of the day before the dream he
had been naughty, and as a punishment he had been deprived of
his evening meal. He had already undergone one such hunger-cure,
and had acted very bravely. He knew that he would get
nothing to eat, but he did not dare to indicate by a word that
he was hungry. Education was beginning to have its influence
upon him; this is expressed even in the dream which shows
the beginnings of dream disfigurement. There is no doubt
that he himself is the person whose wishes are directed toward
this abundant meal, and a meal of roast meat at that. But
since he knows that this is forbidden him, he does not dare, as
children do in the dream ( cf. the dream about strawberries of
my little Anna, p. 110), to sit down to the meal himself. The
person remains anonymous.

II. Once I dream that I see on the show-table of a book
store a new number in the Book-lovers’ Collection—the collection
which I am in the habit of buying (art monographs, monographs
on the history of the world, famous art centres, &c.). The new collection is called Famous Orators (or Orations), and
the first number bears the name of Doctor Lecher.

In the course of analysis it appears improbable that the
fame of Dr. Lecher, the long-winded orator of the German
Opposition, should occupy my thoughts while I am dreaming.
The fact is that, a few days before, I undertook the psychic
cure of some new patients, and was now forced to talk for
from ten to twelve hours a day. Thus I myself am the long-winded
orator.

III. Upon another occasion I dream that a teacher of my
acquaintance at the university says: My son, the Myopic .
Then there follows a dialogue consisting of short speeches and
replies. A third portion of the dream follows in which I and
my sons appear, and as far as the latent dream content is
concerned, father, son, and Professor M. are alike only lay
figures to represent me and my eldest son. I shall consider
this dream again further on because of another peculiarity.

IV. The following dream gives an example of really base
egotistical feelings, which are concealed behind affectionate
concern:

My friend Otto looks ill, his face is brown and his eyes bulge.

Otto is my family physician, to whom I owe a debt greater
than I can ever hope to repay, since he has guarded the health
of my children for years. He has treated them successfully
when they were taken sick, and besides that he has given them
presents on all occasions which gave him any excuse for doing
so. He came for a visit on the day of the dream, and my
wife noticed that he looked tired and exhausted. Then comes
my dream at night, and attributes to him a few of the symptoms
of Basedow’s disease. Any one disregarding my rules for
dream interpretation would understand this dream to mean
that I am concerned about the health of my friend, and that
this concern is realised in the dream. It would thus be a
contradiction not only of the assertion that the dream is a
wish-fulfilment, but also of the assertion that it is accessible
only to egotistic impulses. But let the person who interprets
the dream in this manner explain to me why I fear that Otto
has Basedow’s disease, for which diagnosis his appearance
does not give the slightest justification? As opposed to this,
my analysis furnishes the following material, taken from an occurrence which happened six years ago. A small party of
us, including Professor R., were driving in profound darkness
through the forest of N., which is several hours distant from
our country home. The coachman, who was not quite sober,
threw us and the wagon down a bank, and it was only by a
lucky accident that we all escaped unhurt. But we were
forced to spend the night at the nearest inn, where the news of
our accident awakened great sympathy. A gentleman, who
showed unmistakable signs of the morbus Basedowii—nothing
but a brownish colour of the skin of the face and bulging eyes,
no goitre—placed himself entirely at our disposal and asked
what he could do for us. Professor R. answered in his decided
way: “Nothing but lend me a night-shirt.” Whereupon our
generous friend replied: “I am sorry but I cannot do that,”
and went away.

In continuing the analysis, it occurs to me that Basedow
is the name not only of a physician, but also of a famous
educator. (Now that I am awake I do not feel quite sure of
this fact.) My friend Otto is the person whom I have asked
to take charge of the physical education of my children—especially
during the age of puberty (hence the night-shirt)—in
case anything should happen to me. By seeing Otto in
the dream with the morbid symptoms of our above-mentioned
generous benefactor, I apparently mean to say, “If anything
happens to me, just as little is to be expected for my children
from him as was to be expected then from Baron L., in spite of
his well-meaning offers.” The egotistical turn of this dream
ought now to be clear. [CF]

But where is the wish-fulfilment to be found? It is not
in the vengeance secured upon my friend Otto, whose fate it
seems to be to receive ill-treatment in my dreams, but in the
following circumstances: In representing Otto in the dream
as Baron L., I have at the same time identified myself with
some one else, that is to say, with Professor R., for I have asked
something of Otto, just as R. asked something of Baron L. at the time of the occurrence which has been mentioned. And
that is the point. For Professor R. has pursued his way
independently outside the schools, somewhat as I have done,
and has only in later years received the title which he earned
long ago. I am therefore again wishing to be a professor!
The very phrase “in later years” is the fulfilment of wish,
for it signifies that I shall live long enough to pilot my boy
through the age of puberty myself.

I gave only a brief account of the other forms of typical
dreams in the first edition of this book, because an insufficient
amount of good material was at my disposal. My experience,
which has since been increased, now makes it possible for me
to divide these dreams into two broad classes—first, those
which really have the same meaning every time, and secondly,
those which must be subjected to the most widely different
interpretations in spite of their identical or similar content.
Among the typical dreams of the first sort I shall closely
consider the examination dream and the so-called dream of
dental irritation.

Every one who has received his degree after having passed
the final college examination, complains of the ruthlessness
with which he is pursued by the anxiety dream that he will
fail, that he must repeat his work, &c. For the holder of the
university degree this typical dream is replaced by another,
which represents to him that he has to pass the examination
for the doctor’s degree, and against which he vainly raises the
objection in his sleep that he has already been practising for
years—that he is already a university instructor or the head
of a law firm. These are the ineradicable memories of the
punishments which we suffered when we were children for
misdeeds which we had committed—memories which were
revived in us on that dies irae, dies illa of the severe examination
at the two critical junctures in our studies. The
“examination-phobia” of neurotics is also strengthened by
this childish fear. After we have ceased to be schoolboys it
is no longer our parents and guardians as at first, or our
teachers as later on, who see to our punishment; the inexorable
chain of causes and effects in life has taken over our further
education. Now we dream of examinations for graduation or for the doctor’s degree—and who has not been faint-hearted
in these tests, even though he belonged to the righteous?—whenever
we fear that an outcome will punish us because we
have not done something, or because we have not accomplished
something as we should—in short whenever we feel the weight
of responsibility.

I owe the actual explanation of examination dreams to a
remark made by a well-informed colleague, who once asserted
in a scientific discussion that in his experience the examination
dream occurs only to persons who have passed the examination,
never to those who have gone to pieces on it. The
anxiety dream of the examination, which occurs, as is being
more and more corroborated, when the dreamer is looking
forward to a responsible action on his part the next day and
the possibility of disgrace, has therefore probably selected
an occasion in the past where the great anxiety has shown
itself to have been without justification and has been contradicted
by the result. This would be a very striking example
of a misconception of the dream content on the part of the
waking instance. The objection to the dream, which is conceived
as the indignant protest, “But I am already a
doctor,” &c., would be in reality a consolation which the
dreams offer, and which would therefore be to the following
effect: “Do not be afraid of the morrow; think of the fear
which you had before the final examination, and yet nothing
came of it. You are a doctor this minute,” &c. The fear,
however, which we attribute to the dream, originates in the
remnants of daily experience.

The tests of this explanation which I was able to make in
my own case and in that of others, although they were not
sufficiently numerous, have been altogether successful. I
failed, for example, in the examination for the doctor’s degree
in legal medicine; never once have I been concerned about
this matter in my dreams, while I have often enough been
examined in botany, zoology, or chemistry, in which subjects
I took the examinations with well-founded anxiety, but
escaped punishment through the clemency of fortune or of
the examiner. In my dreams of college examination, I am
regularly examined in history, a subject which I passed
brilliantly at the time, but only, I must admit, because my good-natured professor—my one-eyed benefactor in another
dream ( cf. p. 12)—did not overlook the fact that on the list
of questions I had crossed out the second of three questions
as an indication that he should not insist on it. One of my
patients, who withdrew before the final college examinations
and made them up later, but who failed in the officer’s examination
and did not become an officer, tells me that he dreams
about the former examination often enough, but never about
the latter.

The above-mentioned colleague (Dr. Stekel of Vienna)
calls attention to the double meaning of the word “Matura”
( Matura —examination for college degree: mature, ripe), and
claims that he has observed that examination dreams occur
very frequently when a sexual test is set for the following day,
in which, therefore, the disgrace which is feared might consist
in the manifestation of slight potency. A German colleague
takes exception to this, as it appears, justly, on the ground
that this examination is denominated in Germany the Abiturium
and hence lacks this double meaning.

On account of their similar affective impression dreams of
missing a train deserve to be placed next to examination
dreams. Their explanation also justifies this relationship.
They are consolation dreams directed against another feeling
of fear perceived in the dream, the fear of dying. “To
depart” is one of the most frequent and one of the most easily
reached symbols of death. The dream thus says consolingly:
“Compose yourself, you are not going to die (to depart),” just
as the examination dream calms us by saying “Fear not,
nothing will happen to you even this time.” The difficulty
in understanding both kinds of dreams is due to the fact that
the feeling of anxiety is directly connected with the expression
of consolation. Stekel treats fully the symbolisms of death
in his recently published book Die Sprache des Traumes .

The meaning of the “dreams of dental irritation,” which
I have had to analyse often enough with my patients,
escaped me for a long time, because, much to my astonishment,
resistances that were altogether too great obstructed their
interpretation.

At last overwhelming evidence convinced me that, in the
case of men, nothing else than cravings for masturbation from the time of puberty furnishes the motive power for these
dreams. I shall analyse two such dreams, one of which is
likewise “a dream of flight.” The two dreams are of the
same person—a young man with a strong homosexuality,
which, however, has been repressed in life.

He is witnessing a performance of Fidelio from the parquette
of the opera house; he is sitting next to L., whose personality is
congenial to him, and whose friendship he would like to have.
He suddenly flies diagonally clear across the parquette; he
then puts his hand in his mouth and draws out two of his
teeth.

He himself describes the flight by saying it was as if he
were “thrown” into the air. As it was a performance of Fidelio he recalls the poet’s words:

But even the acquisition of a charming wife is not among the
wishes of the dreamer. Two other verses would be more
appropriate:

The dream thus contains the “lucky (big) throw,” which
is not, however, a wish-fulfilment only. It also conceals the
painful reflection that in his striving after friendship he has
often had the misfortune to be “thrown down,” and the fear
lest this fate may be repeated in the case of the young
man next whom he has enjoyed the performance of Fidelio .
This is now followed by a confession which quite puts this
refined dreamer to shame, to the effect that once, after such
a rejection on the part of a friend, out of burning desire he
merged into sexual excitement and masturbated twice in
succession.

The other dream is as follows: Two professors of the university
who are known to him are treating him in my stead. One
of them does something with his penis; he fears an operation.
The other one thrusts an iron bar at his mouth so that he loses
two teeth. He is bound with four silken cloths.

The sexual significance of this dream can hardly be doubted.
The silken cloths are equivalent to an identification with a homosexual of his acquaintance. The dreamer, who has never
achieved coition, but who has never actually sought sexual
intercourse with men, conceives sexual intercourse after the
model of the masturbation which he was once taught during
the time of puberty.

I believe that the frequent modifications of the typical
dream of dental irritation—that, for example, of another
person drawing the tooth from the dreamer’s mouth, are made
intelligible by means of the same explanation. It may,
however, be difficult to see how “dental irritation” can come
to have this significance. I may then call attention to a
transference from below to above which occurs very frequently.
This transference is at the service of sexual repression, and
by means of it all kinds of sensations and intentions occurring
in hysteria which ought to be enacted in the genitals can be
realised upon less objectionable parts of the body. It is also
a case of such transference when the genitals are replaced by
the face in the symbolism of unconscious thought. This is
assisted by the fact that the buttocks resemble the cheeks, and
also by the usage of language which calls the nymphæ “lips,”
as resembling those that enclose the opening of the mouth.
The nose is compared to the penis in numerous allusions, and
in one place as in the other the presence of hair completes the
resemblance. Only one part of the anatomy—the teeth—are
beyond all possibility of being compared with anything,
and it is just this coincidence of agreement and disagreement
which makes the teeth suitable for representation under
pressure of sexual repression.

I do not wish to claim that the interpretation of the dream
of dental irritation as a dream of masturbation, the justification
of which I cannot doubt, has been freed of all obscurity. [CG] I carry the explanation as far as I am able, and must leave the
rest unsolved. But I must also refer to another connection
revealed by an idiomatic expression. In our country there is
in use an indelicate designation for the act of masturbation,
namely: To pull one out, or to pull one down. [CH] I am unable
to say whence these colloquialisms originate, and on what symbolisms they are based, but the teeth would well fit in
with the first of the two. [CI]

Dreams in which one is flying or hovering, falling, swimming,
or the like, belong to the second group of typical dreams. What
do these dreams signify? A general statement on this point
cannot be made. They signify something different in each case, as we shall hear: only the sensational material which they
contain always comes from the same source.

It is necessary to conclude, from the material obtained in
psychoanalysis, that these dreams repeat impressions from
childhood—that is, that they refer to the movement games
which have such extraordinary attractions for the child. What uncle has never made a child fly by running across the room
with it with arms outstretched, or has never played falling
with it by rocking it on his knee and then suddenly stretching
out his leg, or by lifting it up high and then pretending to
withdraw support. At this the children shout with joy, and
demand more untiringly, especially if there is a little fright and dizziness attached to it; in after years they create a
repetition of this in the dream, but in the dream they omit
the hands which have held them, so that they now freely float
and fall. The fondness of all small children for games like
rocking and see-sawing is well known; and if they see gymnastic
tricks at the circus their recollection of this rocking is
refreshed. With some boys the hysterical attack consists
simply in the reproduction of such tricks, which they accomplish
with great skill. Not infrequently sexual sensations are
excited by these movement games, harmless as they are in
themselves. [CJ] To express the idea by a word which is current
among us, and which covers all of these matters: It is the wild
playing (“Hetzen”) of childhood which dreams about flying,
falling, vertigo, and the like repeat, and the voluptuous feelings
of which have now been turned into fear. But as every
mother knows, the wild playing of children has often enough
culminated in quarrelling and tears.

I therefore have good reason for rejecting the explanation
that the condition of our dermal sensations during sleep, the
sensations caused by the movements of the lungs, and the
like, give rise to dreams of flying and falling. I see that these
very sensations have been reproduced from the memory with
which the dream is concerned—that they are, therefore, a part
of the dream content and not of the dream sources.

This material, similar in its character and origin consisting
of sensations of motion, is now used for the representation of
the most manifold dream thoughts. Dreams of flying, for
the most part characterised by delight, require the most widely
different interpretations—altogether special interpretations in
the case of some persons, and even interpretations of a typical
nature in that of others. One of my patients was in the habit
of dreaming very often that she was suspended above the street at a certain height, without touching the ground. She
had grown only to a very small stature, and shunned every
kind of contamination which accompanies intercourse with
human beings. Her dream of suspension fulfilled both of her
wishes, by raising her feet from the ground and by allowing her
head to tower in the upper regions. In the case of other
female dreamers the dream of flying had the significance of a
longing: If I were a little bird; others thus become angels
at night because they have missed being called that by day.
The intimate connection between flying and the idea of a bird
makes it comprehensible that the dream of flying in the case
of men usually has a significance of coarse sensuality. [CK] We
shall also not be surprised to hear that this or that dreamer is
always very proud of his ability to fly.

Dr. Paul Federn (Vienna) has propounded the fascinating
theory that a great many flying dreams are erection dreams,
since the remarkable phenomena of erection which so constantly
occupy the human phantasy must strongly impress
upon it a notion of the suspension of gravity ( cf. the winged
phalli of the ancients).

Dreams of falling are most frequently characterised by
fear. Their interpretation, when they occur in women, is
subject to no difficulty because women always accept the
symbolic sense of falling, which is a circumlocution for the
indulgence of an erotic temptation. We have not yet exhausted
the infantile sources of the dream of falling; nearly
all children have fallen occasionally, and then been picked up
and fondled; if they fell out of bed at night, they were picked
up by their nurse and taken into her bed.

People who dream often of swimming, of cleaving the waves,
with great enjoyment, &c., have usually been persons who
wetted their beds, and they now repeat in the dream a pleasure
which they have long since learned to forgo. We shall soon
learn from one example or another to what representation the
dreams of swimming easily lend themselves.

The interpretation of dreams about fire justifies a prohibition
of the nursery which forbids children to burn matches
in order that they may not wet the bed at night. They too are based on the reminiscence of enuresis nocturnus of childhood.
In the Bruchstück einer Hysterieanalyse , 1905, [CL] I have given
the complete analysis and synthesis of such a fire-dream in
connection with the infantile history of the dreamer, and have
shown to the representation of what emotions this infantile
material has been utilised in maturer years.

It would be possible to cite a considerable number of other
“typical” dreams, if these are understood to refer to the
frequent recurrence of the same manifest dream content in
the case of different dreamers, as, for example: dreams of
passing through narrow alleys, of walking through a whole
suite of rooms; dreams of the nocturnal burglar against whom
nervous people direct precautionary measures before going to
sleep; dreams of being chased by wild animals (bulls, horses),
or of being threatened with knives, daggers, and lances. The
last two are characteristic as the manifest dream content of
persons suffering from anxiety, &c. An investigation dealing
especially with this material would be well worth while. In
lieu of this I have two remarks to offer, which, however, do not
apply exclusively to typical dreams.

I. The more one is occupied with the solution of dreams,
the more willing one must become to acknowledge that the
majority of the dreams of adults treat of sexual material and
give expression to erotic wishes. Only one who really analyses
dreams, that is to say, who pushes forward from their manifest
content to the latent dream thoughts, can form an opinion on
this subject—never the person who is satisfied with registering
the manifest content (as, for example, Näcke in his works on
sexual dreams). Let us recognise at once that this fact is
not to be wondered at, but that it is in complete harmony with
the fundamental assumptions of dream explanation. No
other impulse has had to undergo so much suppression from
the time of childhood as the sex impulse in its numerous components, [CM] from no other impulse have survived so many and
such intense unconscious wishes, which now act in the sleeping
state in such a manner as to produce dreams. In dream
interpretation, this significance of sexual complexes must never be forgotten, nor must they, of course, be exaggerated to the
point of being considered exclusive.

Of many dreams it can be ascertained by a careful interpretation
that they are even to be taken bisexually, inasmuch as
they result in an irrefutable secondary interpretation in which
they realise homosexual feelings—that is, feelings that are
common to the normal sexual activity of the dreaming person.
But that all dreams are to be interpreted bisexually, as maintained
by W. Stekel, [CN] and Alf. Adler, [CO] seems to me to be a
generalisation as indemonstrable as it is improbable, which I
should not like to support. Above all I should not know how
to dispose of the apparent fact that there are many dreams
satisfying other than—in the widest sense—erotic needs, as
dreams of hunger, thirst, convenience, &c. Likewise the
similar assertions “that behind every dream one finds the
death sentence” (Stekel), and that every dream shows “a
continuation from the feminine to the masculine line” (Adler),
seem to me to proceed far beyond what is admissible in the
interpretation of dreams.

We have already asserted elsewhere that dreams which
are conspicuously innocent invariably embody coarse erotic
wishes, and we might confirm this by means of numerous fresh
examples. But many dreams which appear indifferent, and
which would never be suspected of any particular significance,
can be traced back, after analysis, to unmistakably sexual
wish-feelings, which are often of an unexpected nature. For
example, who would suspect a sexual wish in the following
dream until the interpretation had been worked out? The
dreamer relates: Between two stately palaces stands a little
house, receding somewhat, whose doors are closed. My wife
leads me a little way along the street up to the little house, and
pushes in the door, and then I slip quickly and easily into the
interior of a courtyard that slants obliquely upwards.

Anyone who has had experience in the translating of dreams
will, of course, immediately perceive that penetrating into
narrow spaces, and opening locked doors, belong to the commonest sexual symbolism, and will easily find in this
dream a representation of attempted coition from behind
(between the two stately buttocks of the female body). The
narrow slanting passage is of course the vagina; the assistance
attributed to the wife of the dreamer requires the interpretation
that in reality it is only consideration for the wife which is
responsible for the detention from such an attempt. Moreover,
inquiry shows that on the previous day a young girl had entered
the household of the dreamer who had pleased him, and who
had given him the impression that she would not be altogether
opposed to an approach of this sort. The little house between
the two palaces is taken from a reminiscence of the Hradschin
in Prague, and thus points again to the girl who is a native of
that city.

If with my patients I emphasise the frequency of the
Oedipus dream—of having sexual intercourse with one’s
mother—I get the answer: “I cannot remember such a
dream.” Immediately afterwards, however, there arises the
recollection of another disguised and indifferent dream, which
has been dreamed repeatedly by the patient, and the analysis
shows it to be a dream of this same content—that is, another
Oedipus dream. I can assure the reader that veiled dreams of
sexual intercourse with the mother are a great deal more
frequent than open ones to the same effect. [CP]

There are dreams about landscapes and localities in which
emphasis is always laid upon the assurance: “I have been
there before.” In this case the locality is always the genital
organ of the mother; it can indeed be asserted with such certainty of no other locality that one “has been there
before.”

A large number of dreams, often full of fear, which are concerned
with passing through narrow spaces or with staying in
the water, are based upon fancies about the embryonic life,
about the sojourn in the mother’s womb, and about the act
of birth. The following is the dream of a young man who in
his fancy has already while in embryo taken advantage of
his opportunity to spy upon an act of coition between his
parents.

“ He is in a deep shaft, in which there is a window, as in the
Semmering Tunnel. At first he sees an empty landscape through
this window, and then he composes a picture into it, which is
immediately at hand and which fills out the empty space. The
picture represents a field which is being thoroughly harrowed by an
implement, and the delightful air, the accompanying idea of hard
work, and the bluish-black clods of earth make a pleasant impression.
He then goes on and sees a primary school opened ...
and he is surprised that so much attention is devoted in it to the
sexual feelings of the child, which makes him think of me. ”

Here is a pretty water-dream of a female patient, which
was turned to extraordinary account in the course of treatment.

At her summer resort at the ... Lake, she hurls herself into
the dark water at a place where the pale moon is reflected in the
water.

Dreams of this sort are parturition dreams; their interpretation
is accomplished by reversing the fact reported in
the manifest dream content; thus, instead of “throwing one’s
self into the water,” read “coming out of the water,” that is,
“being born.” The place from which one is born is recognised
if one thinks of the bad sense of the French “la lune.” The
pale moon thus becomes the white “bottom” (Popo), which
the child soon recognises as the place from which it came.
Now what can be the meaning of the patient’s wishing to be
born at her summer resort? I asked the dreamer this, and
she answered without hesitation: “Hasn’t the treatment
made me as though I were born again?” Thus the dream
becomes an invitation to continue the cure at this summer
resort, that is, to visit her there; perhaps it also contains a very bashful allusion to the wish to become a mother
herself. [CQ]

Another dream of parturition, with its interpretation, I
take from the work of E. Jones. [95] “ She stood at the seashore
watching a small boy, who seemed to be hers, wading into the
water. This he did till the water covered him, and she could only
see his head bobbing up and down near the surface. The scene
then changed to the crowded hall of a hotel. Her husband left
her, and she ‘entered into conversation with’ a stranger. ” The
second half of the dream was discovered in the analysis to
represent a flight from her husband, and the entering into intimate
relations with a third person, behind whom was plainly
indicated Mr. X.’s brother mentioned in a former dream. The
first part of the dream was a fairly evident birth phantasy. In
dreams as in mythology, the delivery of a child from the uterine
waters is commonly presented by distortion as the entry of the
child into water; among many others, the births of Adonis,
Osiris, Moses, and Bacchus are well-known illustrations of this.
The bobbing up and down of the head in the water at once
recalled to the patient the sensation of quickening she had
experienced in her only pregnancy. Thinking of the boy going
into the water induced a reverie in which she saw herself taking
him out of the water, carrying him into the nursery, washing
him and dressing him, and installing him in her household.

The second half of the dream, therefore, represents thoughts
concerning the elopement, which belonged to the first half of
the underlying latent content; the first half of the dream corresponded
with the second half of the latent content, the birth
phantasy. Besides this inversion in order, further inversions
took place in each half of the dream. In the first half the child entered the water, and then his head bobbed; in the underlying
dream thoughts first the quickening occurred, and then the child
left the water (a double inversion). In the second half her
husband left her; in the dream thoughts she left her husband.

Another parturition dream is related by Abraham [79] of a
young woman looking forward to her first confinement (p. 22):
From a place in the floor of the house a subterranean canal leads
directly into the water (parturition path, amniotic liquor). She
lifts up a trap in the floor, and there immediately appears a
creature dressed in a brownish fur, which almost resembles
a seal. This creature changes into the younger brother of
the dreamer, to whom she has always stood in maternal
relationship.

Dreams of “saving” are connected with parturition dreams.
To save, especially to save from the water, is equivalent to
giving birth when dreamed by a woman; this sense is, however,
modified when the dreamer is a man. [CR]

Robbers, burglars at night, and ghosts, of which we are
afraid before going to bed, and which occasionally even disturb
our sleep, originate in one and the same childish reminiscence.
They are the nightly visitors who have awakened the child to
set it on the chamber so that it may not wet the bed, or have
lifted the cover in order to see clearly how the child is holding
its hands while sleeping. I have been able to induce an exact
recollection of the nocturnal visitor in the analysis of some of
these anxiety dreams. The robbers were always the father,
the ghosts more probably corresponded to feminine persons
with white night-gowns.

II. When one has become familiar with the abundant use
of symbolism for the representation of sexual material in
dreams, one naturally raises the question whether there are
not many of these symbols which appear once and for all with
a firmly established significance like the signs in stenography;
and one is tempted to compile a new dream-book according to
the cipher method. In this connection it may be remarked
that this symbolism does not belong peculiarly to the dream,
but rather to unconscious thinking, particularly that of the
masses, and it is to be found in greater perfection in the folk-lore,
in the myths, legends, and manners of speech, in the proverbial sayings, and in the current witticisms of a nation
than in its dreams. [CS]

The dream takes advantage of this symbolism in order to
give a disguised representation to its latent thoughts. Among
the symbols which are used in this manner there are of course
many which regularly, or almost regularly, mean the same thing.
Only it is necessary to keep in mind the curious plasticity of
psychic material. Now and then a symbol in the dream content
may have to be interpreted not symbolically, but according to
its real meaning; at another time the dreamer, owing to a
peculiar set of recollections, may create for himself the right to
use anything whatever as a sexual symbol, though it is not
ordinarily used in that way. Nor are the most frequently
used sexual symbols unambiguous every time.

After these limitations and reservations I may call attention
to the following: Emperor and Empress (King and Queen) in
most cases really represent the parents of the dreamer; [CT] the dreamer himself or herself is the prince or princess. All
elongated objects, sticks, tree-trunks, and umbrellas (on account
of the stretching-up which might be compared to an erection),
all elongated and sharp weapons, knives, daggers, and pikes,
are intended to represent the male member. A frequent, not
very intelligible, symbol for the same is a nail-file (on account
of the rubbing and scraping?). Little cases, boxes, caskets,
closets, and stoves correspond to the female part. The symbolism
of lock and key has been very gracefully employed by
Uhland in his song about the “Grafen Eberstein,” to make a
common smutty joke. The dream of walking through a row
of rooms is a brothel or harem dream. Staircases, ladders, and
flights of stairs, or climbing on these, either upwards or downwards,
are symbolic representations of the sexual act. [CU] Smooth walls over which one is climbing, façades of houses upon
which one is letting oneself down, frequently under great
anxiety, correspond to the erect human body, and probably
repeat in the dream reminiscences of the upward climbing of
little children on their parents or foster parents. “Smooth”
walls are men. Often in a dream of anxiety one is holding on
firmly to some projection from a house. Tables, set tables,
and boards are women, perhaps on account of the opposition
which does away with the bodily contours. Since “bed and
board” ( mensa et thorus ) constitute marriage, the former are
often put for the latter in the dream, and as far as practicable
the sexual presentation complex is transposed to the eating
complex. Of articles of dress the woman’s hat may frequently
be definitely interpreted as the male genital. In dreams of
men one often finds the cravat as a symbol for the penis; this
indeed is not only because cravats hang down long, and are
characteristic of the man, but also because one can select them
at pleasure, a freedom which is prohibited by nature in the
original of the symbol. Persons who make use of this symbol
in the dream are very extravagant with cravats, and possess
regular collections of them. [CV] All complicated machines and
apparatus in dream are very probably genitals, in the description
of which dream symbolism shows itself to be as tireless as
the activity of wit. Likewise many landscapes in dreams,
especially with bridges or with wooded mountains, can be
readily recognised as descriptions of the genitals. Finally
where one finds incomprehensible neologisms one may think
of combinations made up of components having a sexual significance. Children also in the dream often signify the
genitals, as men and women are in the habit of fondly referring
to their genital organ as their “little one.” As a very recent
symbol of the male genital may be mentioned the flying machine,
utilisation of which is justified by its relation to flying as well
as occasionally by its form. To play with a little child or to
beat a little one is often the dream’s representation of onanism.
A number of other symbols, in part not sufficiently verified,
are given by Stekel, [114] who illustrates them with examples.
Right and left, according to him, are to be conceived in the
dream in an ethical sense. “The right way always signifies
the road to righteousness, the left the one to crime. Thus the
left may signify homosexuality, incest, and perversion, while
the right signifies marriage, relations with a prostitute, &c.
The meaning is always determined by the individual moral
viewpoint of the dreamer” ( l.c. , p. 466). Relatives in the
dream generally play the rôle of genitals (p. 473). Not to be
able to catch up with a wagon is interpreted by Stekel as
regret not to be able to come up to a difference in age (p. 479).
Baggage with which one travels is the burden of sin by which
one is oppressed ( ibid. ). Also numbers, which frequently
occur in the dream, are assigned by Stekel a fixed symbolical
meaning, but these interpretations seem neither sufficiently
verified nor of general validity, although the interpretation in
individual cases can generally be recognised as probable. In
a recently published book by W. Stekel, Die Sprache des
Traumes , which I was unable to utilise, there is a list (p. 72)
of the most common sexual symbols, the object of which is to
prove that all sexual symbols can be bisexually used. He
states: “Is there a symbol which (if in any way permitted by
the phantasy) may not be used simultaneously in the masculine
and the feminine sense!” To be sure the clause in parentheses
takes away much of the absoluteness of this assertion, for
this is not at all permitted by the phantasy. I do not, however,
think it superfluous to state that in my experience Stekel’s
general statement has to give way to the recognition of a
greater manifoldness. Besides those symbols, which are just
as frequent for the male as for the female genitals, there are
others which preponderately, or almost exclusively, designate
one of the sexes, and there are still others of which only the male or only the female signification is known. To use long,
firm objects and weapons as symbols of the female genitals,
or hollow objects (chests, boxes, pouches, &c.), as symbols of
the male genitals, is indeed not allowed by the fancy.

It is true that the tendency of the dream and the unconscious
fancy to utilise the sexual symbol bisexually betrays
an archaic trend, for in childhood a difference in the genitals
is unknown, and the same genitals are attributed to both
sexes.

These very incomplete suggestions may suffice to stimulate
others to make a more careful collection. [CW]

I shall now add a few examples of the application of such
symbolisms in dreams, which will serve to show how impossible
it becomes to interpret a dream without taking into
account the symbolism of dreams, and how imperatively it
obtrudes itself in many cases.

1. The hat as a symbol of the man (of the male genital): [CX] (a fragment from the dream of a young woman who suffered
from agoraphobia on account of a fear of temptation).

“I am walking in the street in summer, I wear a straw hat
of peculiar shape, the middle piece of which is bent upwards
and the side pieces of which hang downwards (the description
became here obstructed), and in such a fashion that one is
lower than the other. I am cheerful and in a confidential
mood, and as I pass a troop of young officers I think to myself:
None of you can have any designs upon me.”

As she could produce no associations to the hat, I said to
her: “The hat is really a male genital, with its raised middle
piece and the two downward hanging side pieces.” I intentionally
refrained from interpreting those details concerning
the unequal downward hanging of the two side pieces, although
just such individualities in the determinations lead the way to
the interpretation. I continued by saying that if she only had
a man with such a virile genital she would not have to fear the officers—that is, she would have nothing to wish from them,
for she is mainly kept from going without protection and
company by her fancies of temptation. This last explanation
of her fear I had already been able to give her repeatedly on
the basis of other material.

It is quite remarkable how the dreamer behaved after this
interpretation. She withdrew her description of the hat, and
claimed not to have said that the two side pieces were hanging
downwards. I was, however, too sure of what I had heard to
allow myself to be misled, and I persisted in it. She was quiet
for a while, and then found the courage to ask why it was that
one of her husband’s testicles was lower than the other, and
whether it was the same in all men. With this the peculiar
detail of the hat was explained, and the whole interpretation
was accepted by her. The hat symbol was familiar to me
long before the patient related this dream. From other but
less transparent cases I believe that the hat may also be taken
as a female genital.

2. The little one as the genital—to be run over as a symbol
of sexual intercourse (another dream of the same agoraphobic
patient).

“Her mother sends away her little daughter so that she
must go alone. She rides with her mother to the railroad and
sees her little one walking directly upon the tracks, so that she
cannot avoid being run over. She hears the bones crackle.
(From this she experiences a feeling of discomfort but no real
horror.) She then looks out through the car window to see
whether the parts cannot be seen behind. She then reproaches
her mother for allowing the little one to go out alone.”
Analysis. It is not an easy matter to give here a complete
interpretation of the dream. It forms part of a cycle of dreams,
and can be fully understood only in connection with the others.
For it is not easy to get the necessary material sufficiently
isolated to prove the symbolism. The patient at first finds
that the railroad journey is to be interpreted historically as an
allusion to a departure from a sanatorium for nervous diseases,
with the superintendent of which she naturally was in love.
Her mother took her away from this place, and the physician
came to the railroad station and handed her a bouquet of
flowers on leaving; she felt uncomfortable because her mother witnessed this homage. Here the mother, therefore, appears
as a disturber of her love affairs, which is the rôle actually
played by this strict woman during her daughter’s girlhood.
The next thought referred to the sentence: “She then looks
to see whether the parts can be seen behind.” In the dream
façade one would naturally be compelled to think of the parts
of the little daughter run over and ground up. The thought,
however, turns in quite a different direction. She recalls
that she once saw her father in the bath-room naked from
behind; she then begins to talk about the sex differentiation,
and asserts that in the man the genitals can be seen from
behind, but in the woman they cannot. In this connection
she now herself offers the interpretation that the little one is
the genital, her little one (she has a four-year-old daughter)
her own genital. She reproaches her mother for wanting her
to live as though she had no genital, and recognises this reproach
in the introductory sentence of the dream; the mother
sends away her little one so that she must go alone. In her
phantasy going alone on the street signifies to have no man and
no sexual relations (coire = to go together), and this she does
not like. According to all her statements she really suffered
as a girl on account of the jealousy of her mother, because she
showed a preference for her father.

The “little one” has been noted [CY] as a symbol for the male
or the female genitals by Stekel, who can refer in this connection
to a very widespread usage of language.

The deeper interpretation of this dream depends upon
another dream of the same night in which the dreamer
identifies herself with her brother. She was a “tomboy,”
and was always being told that she should have been born a
boy. This identification with the brother shows with special
clearness that “the little one” signifies the genital. The
mother threatened him (her) with castration, which could only
be understood as a punishment for playing with the parts,
and the identification, therefore, shows that she herself had
masturbated as a child, though this fact she now retained only in a memory concerning her brother. An early knowledge of
the male genital which she later lost she must have acquired at
that time according to the assertions of this second dream.
Moreover the second dream points to the infantile sexual theory
that girls originate from boys through castration. After I had
told her of this childish belief, she at once confirmed it with an
anecdote in which the boy asks the girl: “Was it cut off?”
to which the girl replied, “No, it’s always been so.”

The sending away of the little one, of the genital, in the
first dream therefore also refers to the threatened castration.
Finally she blames her mother for not having been born a boy.

That “being run over” symbolises sexual intercourse would
not be evident from this dream if we were not sure of it from
many other sources.

3. Representation of the genital by structures, stairways,
and shafts. (Dream of a young man inhibited by a father
complex.)

“He is taking a walk with his father in a place which is
surely the Prater, for the Rotunda may be seen in front of which
there is a small front structure to which is attached a captive
balloon; the balloon, however, seems quite collapsed. His
father asks him what this is all for; he is surprised at it, but
he explains it to his father. They come into a court in which
lies a large sheet of tin. His father wants to pull off a big
piece of this, but first looks around to see if anyone is watching.
He tells his father that all he needs to do is to speak to the
watchman, and then he can take without any further difficulty
as much as he wants to. From this court a stairway leads
down into a shaft, the walls of which are softly upholstered
something like a leather pocket-book. At the end of this shaft
there is a longer platform, and then a new shaft begins....”

Analysis. This dream belongs to a type of patient which
is not favourable from a therapeutic point of view. They
follow in the analysis without offering any resistances whatever
up to a certain point, but from that point on they remain
almost inaccessible. This dream he almost analysed himself.
“The Rotunda,” he said, “is my genital, the captive balloon
in front is my penis, about the weakness of which I have
worried.” We must, however, interpret in greater detail; the
Rotunda is the buttock which is regularly associated by the child with the genital, the smaller front structure is the
scrotum. In the dream his father asks him what this is all
for—that is, he asks him about the purpose and arrangement
of the genitals. It is quite evident that this state of affairs
should be turned around, and that he should be the questioner.
As such a questioning on the side of the father has never taken
place in reality, we must conceive the dream thought as a wish,
or take it conditionally, as follows: “If I had only asked my
father for sexual enlightenment.” The continuation of this
thought we shall soon find in another place.

The court in which the tin sheet is spread out is not to be
conceived symbolically in the first instance, but originates
from his father’s place of business. For discretionary reasons
I have inserted the tin for another material in which the father
deals, without, however, changing anything in the verbal expression
of the dream. The dreamer had entered his father’s
business, and had taken a terrible dislike to the questionable
practices upon which profit mainly depends. Hence the continuation
of the above dream thought (“if I had only asked
him”) would be: “He would have deceived me just as he
does his customers.” For the pulling off, which serves to
represent commercial dishonesty, the dreamer himself gives a
second explanation—namely, onanism. This is not only
entirely familiar to us (see above, p. 234), but agrees very well
with the fact that the secrecy of onanism is expressed by its
opposite (“Why one can do it quite openly”). It, moreover,
agrees entirely with our expectations that the onanistic activity
is again put off on the father, just as was the questioning in the
first scene of the dream. The shaft he at once interprets as
the vagina by referring to the soft upholstering of the walls.
That the act of coition in the vagina is described as a going
down instead of in the usual way as a going up, I have also
found true in other instances. [CZ]

The details that at the end of the first shaft there is a
longer platform and then a new shaft, he himself explains
biographically. He had for some time consorted with women
sexually, but had then given it up because of inhibitions and
now hopes to be able to take it up again with the aid of the
treatment. The dream, however, becomes indistinct toward the end, and to the experienced interpreter it becomes evident
that in the second scene of the dream the influence of another
subject has begun to assert itself; in this his father’s business
and his dishonest practices signify the first vagina represented
as a shaft so that one might think of a reference to the mother.

4. The male genital symbolised by persons and the female
by a landscape.

(Dream of a woman of the lower class, whose husband is a
policeman, reported by B. Dattner.)

... Then someone broke into the house and anxiously
called for a policeman. But he went with two tramps by
mutual consent into a church, [DA] to which led a great many
stairs; [DB] behind the church there was a mountain, [DC] on top of
which a dense forest. [DD] The policeman was furnished with a
helmet, a gorget, and a cloak. [DE] The two vagrants, who went
along with the policeman quite peaceably, had tied to their
loins sack-like aprons. [DF] A road led from the church to the
mountain. This road was overgrown on each side with grass
and brushwood, which became thicker and thicker as it reached
the height of the mountain, where it spread out into quite a
forest.

5. A stairway dream.

(Reported and interpreted by Otto Rank.)

For the following transparent pollution dream, I am indebted
to the same colleague who furnished us with the
dental-irritation dream reported on p. 235.

“I am running down the stairway in the stair-house after
a little girl, whom I wish to punish because she has done something
to me. At the bottom of the stairs some one held the
child for me. (A grown-up woman?) I grasp it, but do not
know whether I have hit it, for I suddenly find myself in the
middle of the stairway where I practise coitus with the child
(in the air as it were). It is really no coitus, I only rub my
genital on her external genital, and in doing this I see it very
distinctly, as distinctly as I see her head which is lying sideways. During the sexual act I see hanging to the left and
above me (also as if in the air) two small pictures, landscapes,
representing a house on a green. On the smaller one my
surname stood in the place where the painter’s signature
should be; it seemed to be intended for my birthday present.
A small sign hung in front of the pictures to the effect that
cheaper pictures could also be obtained. I then see myself
very indistinctly lying in bed, just as I had seen myself at
the foot of the stairs, and I am awakened by a feeling of
dampness which came from the pollution.”

Interpretation. The dreamer had been in a book-store on
the evening of the day of the dream, where, while he was waiting,
he examined some pictures which were exhibited, which
represented motives similar to the dream pictures. He stepped
nearer to a small picture which particularly took his fancy in
order to see the name of the artist, which, however, was quite
unknown to him.

Later in the same evening, in company, he heard about a
Bohemian servant-girl who boasted that her illegitimate child
“was made on the stairs.” The dreamer inquired about the
details of this unusual occurrence, and learned that the servant-girl
went with her lover to the home of her parents, where
there was no opportunity for sexual relations, and that the
excited man performed the act on the stairs. In witty allusion
to the mischievous expression used about wine-adulterers,
the dreamer remarked, “The child really grew on the cellar
steps.”

These experiences of the day, which are quite prominent
in the dream content, were readily reproduced by the dreamer.
But he just as readily reproduced an old fragment of infantile
recollection which was also utilised by the dream. The stair-house
was the house in which he had spent the greatest part
of his childhood, and in which he had first become acquainted
with sexual problems. In this house he used, among other
things, to slide down the banister astride which caused him to
become sexually excited. In the dream he also comes down
the stairs very rapidly—so rapidly that, according to his own
distinct assertions, he hardly touched the individual stairs, but
rather “flew” or “slid down,” as we used to say. Upon
reference to this infantile experience, the beginning of the dream seems to represent the factor of sexual excitement.
In the same house and in the adjacent residence the dreamer
used to play pugnacious games with the neighbouring children,
in which he satisfied himself just as he did in the dream.

If one recalls from Freud’s investigation of sexual symbolism [DG] that in the dream stairs or climbing stairs almost
regularly symbolises coitus, the dream becomes clear. Its
motive power as well as its effect, as is shown by the pollution,
is of a purely libidinous nature. Sexual excitement
became aroused during the sleeping state (in the dream this
is represented by the rapid running or sliding down the stairs)
and the sadistic thread in this is, on the basis of the pugnacious
playing, indicated in the pursuing and overcoming of the child.
The libidinous excitement becomes enhanced and urges to
sexual action (represented in the dream by the grasping of
the child and the conveyance of it to the middle of the stairway).
Up to this point the dream would be one of pure
sexual symbolism, and obscure for the unpractised dream
interpreter. But this symbolic gratification, which would
have insured undisturbed sleep, was not sufficient for the
powerful libidinous excitement. The excitement leads to an
orgasm, and thus the whole stairway symbolism is unmasked
as a substitute for coitus. Freud lays stress on the rhythmical
character of both actions as one of the reasons for the sexual
utilisation of the stairway symbolism, and this dream especially
seems to corroborate this, for, according to the express
assertion of the dreamer, the rhythm of a sexual act was the
most pronounced feature in the whole dream.

Still another remark concerning the two pictures, which,
aside from their real significance, also have the value of “Weibsbilder”
(literally woman-pictures , but idiomatically women ).
This is at once shown by the fact that the dream deals with
a big and a little picture, just as the dream content presents
a big (grown up) and a little girl. That cheap pictures could
also be obtained points to the prostitution complex, just as
the dreamer’s surname on the little picture and the thought
that it was intended for his birthday, point to the parent
complex (to be born on the stairway—to be conceived in
coitus).

The indistinct final scene, in which the dreamer sees himself
on the staircase landing lying in bed and feeling wet,
seems to go back into childhood even beyond the infantile
onanism, and manifestly has its prototype in similarly pleasurable
scenes of bed-wetting.

6. A modified stair-dream.

To one of my very nervous patients, who was an abstainer,
whose fancy was fixed on his mother, and who repeatedly
dreamed of climbing stairs accompanied by his mother, I once
remarked that moderate masturbation would be less harmful
to him than enforced abstinence. This influence provoked
the following dream:

“His piano teacher reproaches him for neglecting his piano-playing,
and for not practising the Études of Moscheles and
Clementi’s Gradus ad Parnassum .” In relation to this he
remarked that the Gradus is only a stairway, and that the
piano itself is only a stairway as it has a scale.

It is correct to say that there is no series of associations
which cannot be adapted to the representation of sexual facts.
I conclude with the dream of a chemist, a young man, who
has been trying to give up his habit of masturbation by
replacing it with intercourse with women.

Preliminary statement. —On the day before the dream he
had given a student instruction concerning Grignard’s reaction,
in which magnesium is to be dissolved in absolutely pure
ether under the catalytic influence of iodine. Two days before,
there had been an explosion in the course of the same reaction,
in which the investigator had burned his hand.

Dream I. He is to make phenylmagnesiumbromid; he sees
the apparatus with particular clearness, but he has substituted
himself for the magnesium. He is now in a curious swaying
attitude. He keeps repeating to himself, “This is the right thing,
it is working, my feet are beginning to dissolve and my knees
are getting soft.” Then he reaches down and feels for his feet,
and meanwhile (he does not know how) he takes his legs out of
the crucible, and then again he says to himself, “That cannot
be.... Yes, it must be so, it has been done correctly.” Then
he partially awakens, and repeats the dream to himself, because
he wants to tell it to me. He is distinctly afraid of the analysis of the dream. He is much excited during this semi-sleeping state,
and repeats continually, “Phenyl, phenyl.”

II. He is in ... ing with his whole family; at half-past
eleven. He is to be at the Schottenthor for a rendezvous with a
certain lady, but he does not wake up until half-past eleven. He
says to himself, “It is too late now; when you get there it will
be half-past twelve.” The next instant he sees the whole family
gathered about the table—his mother and the servant girl with
the soup-tureen with particular clearness. Then he says to
himself, “Well, if we are eating already, I certainly can’t get
away.”

Analysis: He feels sure that even the first dream contains
a reference to the lady whom he is to meet at the rendezvous
(the dream was dreamed during the night before the expected
meeting). The student to whom he gave the instruction is a
particularly unpleasant fellow; he had said to the chemist:
“That isn’t right,” because the magnesium was still unaffected,
and the latter answered as though he did not care anything
about it: “It certainly isn’t right.” He himself must be
this student; he is as indifferent towards his analysis as
the student is towards his synthesis; the He in the dream,
however, who accomplishes the operation, is myself. How
unpleasant he must seem to me with his indifference towards
the success achieved!

Moreover, he is the material with which the analysis (synthesis)
is made. For it is a question of the success of the
treatment. The legs in the dream recall an impression of the
previous evening. He met a lady at a dancing lesson whom
he wished to conquer; he pressed her to him so closely that
she once cried out. After he had stopped pressing against
her legs, he felt her firm responding pressure against his lower
thighs as far as just above his knees, at the place mentioned
in the dream. In this situation, then, the woman is the
magnesium in the retort, which is at last working. He is
feminine towards me, as he is masculine towards the woman.
If it will work with the woman, the treatment will also work.
Feeling and becoming aware of himself in the region of his
knees refers to masturbation, and corresponds to his fatigue
of the previous day.... The rendezvous had actually been
set for half-past eleven. His wish to over-sleep and to remain with his usual sexual objects (that is, with masturbation)
corresponds with his resistance.

In relation to the repetition of the name phenyl, he gives
the following thoughts: All these radicals ending in yl have
always been pleasing to him; they are very convenient to
use: benzyl, azetyl, &c. That, however, explained nothing.
But when I proposed the radical Schlemihl [DH] he laughed
heartily, and related that during the summer he had read a
book by Prévost which contained a chapter: “Les exclus de
l’amour,” the description in which made him think of the
Schlemihls, and he added, “That is my case.” He would
have again acted the Schlemihl if he had missed the rendezvous.